Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 32310 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
32310.
(a) Except as provided in Article 2 (commencing with Section 32400) of this chapter and in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 17700) of Division 2 of Title 2, any person in this state who manufactures or causes to be manufactured, imports into the state, keeps for sale, or offers or exposes for sale, or who gives, lends, buys, or receives any large-capacity magazine is punishable by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding one year or imprisonment pursuant to subdivision (h) of Section 1170.
(b) Except as provided in Article 2 (commencing with Section 32400) of this chapter and in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 17700) of Division 2 of Title 2, commencing July 1, 2017, any person in this state who possesses any large-capacity magazine, regardless of the date the magazine was acquired, is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) upon the first offense, by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250) upon the second offense, and by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500) upon the third or subsequent offense.
(c) A person who, prior to July 1, 2017, legally possesses a large-capacity magazine shall dispose of that magazine by any of the following means:
(1) Remove the large-capacity magazine from the state.
(2) Prior to July 1, 2017, sell the large-capacity magazine to a licensed firearms dealer.
(3) Destroy the large-capacity magazine.
(4) Surrender the large-capacity magazine to a law enforcement agency for destruction.
(d) For purposes of this section, “manufacturing” includes both fabricating a magazine and assembling a magazine from a combination of parts, including, but not limited to, the body, spring, follower, and floor plate or end plate, to be a fully functioning large-capacity magazine.
(e) The provisions of this section are cumulative and shall not be construed as restricting the application of any other law. However, an act or omission punishable in different ways by different provisions of this code shall not be punished under more than one provision.
SEC. 2.
Section 32400 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
32400.
Section 32310 does not apply to the sale of, giving of, lending of, possession of, importation into this state of, or purchase of, any large-capacity magazine to or by any federal, state, county, city and county, or city agency that is charged with the enforcement of any law, for use by agency employees in the discharge of their official duties, whether on or off duty, and where the use is authorized by the agency and is within the course and scope of their duties.
SEC. 3.
Section 32405 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
32405.
Section 32310 does not apply to the sale to, lending to, transfer to, purchase by, receipt of, possession of, or importation into this state of, a large-capacity magazine by a sworn peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2, or a sworn federal law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry a firearm in the course and scope of that officer’s duties.
SEC. 4.
Section 32406 is added to the Penal Code, to read:
32406.
Subdivisions (b) and (c) of Section 32310 do not apply to the following:
(a) An individual who honorably retired from being a sworn peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 830) of Title 3 of Part 2, or an individual who honorably retired from being a sworn federal law enforcement officer, who was authorized to carry a firearm in the course and scope of that officer’s duties. For purposes of this section, “honorably retired” has the same meaning as provided in Section 16690.
(b) A federal, state, or local historical society, museum or institutional society, or museum or institutional collection, that is open to the public, provided that the large-capacity magazine is unloaded, properly housed within secured premises, and secured from unauthorized handling.
(c) A person who finds a large-capacity magazine, if the person is not prohibited from possessing firearms or ammunition, and possessed it no longer than necessary to deliver or transport it to the nearest law enforcement agency.
(d) A forensic laboratory, or an authorized agent or employee thereof in the course and scope of his or her authorized activities.
(e) The receipt or disposition of a large-capacity magazine by a trustee of a trust, or an executor or administrator of an estate, including an estate that is subject to probate, that includes a large-capacity magazine.
(f) A person lawfully in possession of a firearm that the person obtained prior to January 1, 2000, if no magazine that holds 10 or fewer rounds of ammunition is compatible with that firearm and the person possesses the large-capacity magazine solely for use with that firearm.
SEC. 5.
Section 32410 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
32410.
Section 32310 does not apply to the possession, sale, or purchase of any large-capacity magazine to or by a person licensed pursuant to Sections 26700 to 26915, inclusive.
SEC. 6.
Section 32420 of the Penal Code is repealed.
SEC. 7.
Section 32425 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
32425.
Section 32310 does not apply to either of the following:
(a) The lending or giving of any large-capacity magazine to, or possession of that magazine by, a person licensed pursuant to Sections 26700 to 26915, inclusive, or to a gunsmith, for the purposes of maintenance, repair, or modification of that large-capacity magazine.
(b) The return to its owner of any large-capacity magazine by a person specified in subdivision (a).
SEC. 8.
Section 32430 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
32430.
Section 32310 does not apply to the possession of, importation into this state of, or sale of, any large-capacity magazine by a person who has been issued a permit to engage in those activities pursuant to Section 32315, when those activities are in accordance with the terms and conditions of that permit.
SEC. 9.
Section 32435 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
32435.
Section 32310 does not apply to any of the following:
(a) The sale of, giving of, lending of, possession of, importation into this state of, or purchase of, any large-capacity magazine, to or by any entity that operates an armored vehicle business pursuant to the laws of this state.
(b) The lending of large-capacity magazines by an entity specified in subdivision (a) to its authorized employees, and the possession of those large-capacity magazines by those authorized employees, while in the course and scope of employment for purposes that pertain to the entity’s armored vehicle business.
(c) The return of those large-capacity magazines to the entity specified in subdivision (a) by those employees specified in subdivision (b).
SEC. 10.
Section 32450 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
32450.
Section 32310 does not apply to the purchase or possession of a large-capacity magazine by the holder of a special weapons permit issued pursuant to Section 31000, 32650, or 33300, or pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 18900) of Chapter 1 of Division 5 of Title 2, or pursuant to Article 4 (commencing with Section 32700) of Chapter 6 of this division, for any of the following purposes:
(a) For use solely as a prop for a motion picture, television, or video production.
(b) For export pursuant to federal regulations.
(c) For resale to law enforcement agencies, government agencies, or the military, pursuant to applicable federal regulations.
SEC. 11.
No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution because the only costs that may be incurred by a local agency or school district will be incurred because this act creates a new crime or infraction, eliminates a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the meaning of Section 17556 of the Government Code, or changes the definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution.
A_model:
The California State Legislature has passed a law that regulates the possession, sale, and purchase of large-capacity magazines. The law defines a large-capacity magazine as one that can hold 10 or more rounds of ammunition. It makes it illegal to manufacture, import, keep for sale, offer for sale, or give away any large-capacity magazine, except for certain federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies and museums. The law also provides exceptions for certain individuals who are retired law enforcement officers or federal law enforcement officers, and for the possession of large-capacity magazines by individuals who are lawfully in possession of a firearm that is incompatible with a magazine that holds 10 or fewer rounds of ammunition. The law also establishes a permit system for certain individuals and entities that engage in the sale or possession of large-capacity magazines.
A:
(1) Existing law prohibits the sale, gift, and loan of a large-capacity magazine. A violation of this prohibition is punishable as a misdemeanor with specified penalties or as a felony.
This bill would, commencing July 1, 2017, make it an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed $100 for the first offense, by a fine not to exceed $250 for the 2nd offense, and by a fine not to exceed $500 for the 3rd or subsequent offense, for a person to possess any large-capacity magazine, regardless of the date the magazine was acquired. The bill would require a person in lawful possession of a large-capacity magazine prior to July 1, 2017, to dispose of the magazine, as provided.
By creating a new crime, this bill would impose a state-mandated local program.
(2) Existing law creates various exceptions to the crime described in paragraph (1) above, which include, but are not limited to, the sale of, giving of, lending of, importation into this state of, or purchase of, any large-capacity magazine to or by the holder of a special weapons permit for use as a prop for a motion picture, or any federal, state, county, city and county, or city agency that is charged with the enforcement of any law, for use by agency employees in the discharge of their official duties, whether on or off duty, and where the use is authorized by the agency and is within the course and scope of their duties.
This bill would make conforming changes to those exceptions by including possession of a large-capacity magazine in those provisions and would establish additional exceptions to the crime described in paragraph (1) above, including exceptions to allow licensed gunsmiths and honorably retired sworn peace officers to possess a large-capacity magazine.
The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.
This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 69432.9 of the Education Code is amended to read:
69432.9.
(a) A Cal Grant applicant shall submit a complete official financial aid application pursuant to Section 69433 and applicable regulations adopted by the commission. Each pupil enrolled in grade 12 in a California public school, including a charter school, other than pupils who opt out as provided in subdivision (d), shall be deemed to be a Cal Grant applicant.
(b) Financial need shall be determined to establish an applicant’s initial eligibility for a Cal Grant award and a renewing recipient’s continued eligibility using the federal financial need methodology pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 69506 and applicable regulations adopted by the commission, and as established by Title IV of the federal Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended (20 U.S.C. Secs. 1070 et seq.).
(1) “Expected family contribution,” with respect to an applicant or renewing recipient, shall be determined using the federal methodology pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 69506 (as established by Title IV of the federal Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended (20 U.S.C. Secs. 1070 et seq.)) and applicable rules and regulations adopted by the commission.
(2) “Financial need” means the difference between the student’s cost of attendance as determined by the commission and the expected family contribution. The calculation of financial need shall be consistent with Title IV of the federal Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended (20 U.S.C. Secs. 1070 et seq.).
(3) (A) The minimum financial need required for receipt of an initial and renewal Cal Grant A or C award shall be no less than the maximum annual award value for the applicable institution, plus an additional one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) of financial need.
(B) The minimum financial need required for receipt of an initial and renewal Cal Grant B award shall be no less than seven hundred dollars ($700).
(c) (1) The commission shall require that a grade point average be submitted to it for all Cal Grant A and B applicants, except for those permitted to provide test scores in lieu of a grade point average.
(2) The commission shall require that a grade point average be submitted to it electronically on a standardized form for all grade 12 pupils at public schools, including charter schools, each academic year, except for pupils who have opted out as provided in subdivision (d). Social security numbers shall not be included in the information submitted to the commission. However, if the commission determines that a social security number is required to complete the application for financial aid, the school, school district, or charter school may obtain permission from the parent or guardian of the pupil, or the pupil, if he or she is 18 years of age, to submit the pupil’s social security number to the commission.
(3) The commission shall require that each report of a grade point average include a certification, executed under penalty of perjury, by a school official, that the grade point average reported is accurately reported. The certification shall include a statement that it is subject to review by the commission or its designee.
(4) The commission shall adopt regulations that establish a grace period for receipt of the grade point average and any appropriate corrections, and that set forth the circumstances under which a student may submit a specified test score designated by the commission, by regulation, in lieu of submitting a qualifying grade point average.
(5) It is the intent of the Legislature that high schools and institutions of higher education certify the grade point averages of their students in time to meet the application deadlines imposed by this chapter.
(6) It is the intent of the Legislature that the commission make available to each high school and school district a report identifying all grade 12 pupils within the high school or school district, respectively, who have and have not completed the Free Application for Federal Student Aid or the California Dream Act Application.
(d) (1) The school district or charter school shall, no later than October 15 of a pupil’s grade 12 academic year, notify, in writing, each grade 12 pupil and, for a pupil under 18 years of age, his or her parent or guardian that, pursuant to subdivision (a), the pupil will be deemed a Cal Grant applicant unless the pupil opts out within a period of time specified in the notice, which shall not be less than 30 days. The required notice shall indicate when the school will first send grade point averages to the commission. The school district or charter school shall provide an opportunity for the pupil to opt out of being automatically deemed a Cal Grant applicant.
(2) Until a pupil turns 18 years of age, only a parent or guardian may opt the pupil out. Once a pupil turns 18 years of age, only the pupil may opt himself or herself out and, if prior to the conclusion of the notice period, the pupil may opt in over the prior decision of a parent or guardian to opt out.
SEC. 2.
Section 69432.92 is added to the Education Code, to read:
69432.92.
(a) The commission may require verification of high school graduation or its equivalent to be electronically submitted for all former grade 12 pupils who graduated from public schools, including charter schools, in the prior academic year, except for pupils who have opted out as provided in subdivision (d) of Section 69432.9.
(b) It is the intent of the Legislature that high schools or high school districts verify the graduation of their pupils in time to meet the deadlines imposed by subdivision (e) of Section 69433.9.
SEC. 3.
If the Commission on State Mandates determines that this act contains costs mandated by the state, reimbursement to local agencies and school districts for those costs shall be made pursuant to Part 7 (commencing with Section 17500) of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code.
A_model:
The article describes a new law in California that requires all high school students in the state to submit a complete financial aid application in order to be considered for a Cal Grant, a state-funded grant program for college students. The law also specifies that the commission determining eligibility for Cal Grants will use federal financial need methodology and that the minimum financial need required for receipt of an initial and renewal Cal Grant A or C award shall be no less than the maximum annual award value for the applicable institution, plus an additional $1,500 of financial need. Additionally, the law requires that a grade point average be submitted to the commission for all Cal Grant A and B applicants, except for those permitted to provide test scores in lieu of a grade point average. The law also allows high schools and institutions of higher education to certify the grade point averages of their students in time to meet the application deadlines imposed by the law.
A:
The Cal Grant Program establishes the Cal Grant A and B Entitlement awards, the California Community College Transfer Entitlement awards, the Competitive Cal Grant A and B awards, the Cal Grant C award, and the Cal Grant T award under the administration of the Student Aid Commission, and establishes eligibility requirements for awards under these programs for participating students attending qualifying institutions. As part of these eligibility requirements, existing law requires the commission to require that a grade point average be submitted to it electronically for all grade 12 pupils at public schools, including charter schools, each academic year, except as specified.
This bill would require this electronic submission to be on a standardized form. The bill would also authorize the commission to require that verification of high school graduation or its equivalent be electronically submitted for all former grade 12 pupils who graduated from public schools, including charter schools, in the prior academic year, except for pupils who have opted out, as specified. By requiring the electronic submission of grade point average information to be on a standardized form, and authorizing the commission to additionally require verification of graduation information of prior grade 12 pupils, this bill would impose a state-mandated local program.
The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.
This bill would provide that, if the Commission on State Mandates determines that the bill contains costs mandated by the state, reimbursement for those costs shall be made pursuant to these statutory provisions.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting this act to develop additional data to better evaluate whether a combined-use highways system is workable in the County of Inyo. It is further the intent of the Legislature that no General Fund moneys be expended for the pilot project established by this act, and the project will be revenue neutral to the state.
SEC. 2.
Section 38026.1 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read:
38026.1.
(a) Except as provided in subdivision (e), the County of Inyo may establish a pilot project to designate combined-use highways on unincorporated county roads in the county for no more than 10 miles so that the combined-use highways can be used to link existing off-highway motor vehicle trails and trailheads on federal Bureau of Land Management or United States Forest Service lands, and to link off-highway motor vehicle recreational-use areas with necessary service and lodging facilities, in order to provide a unified system of trails for off-highway motor vehicles, preserve traffic safety, improve natural resource protection, reduce off-highway vehicle trespass on private land, and minimize impacts on county residents.
(b) A pilot project established pursuant to this section shall do all of the following:
(1) Prescribe a procedure for highway, road, or route selection and designation. The procedure shall be approved by a vote of a majority of the county’s board of supervisors.
(2) Prescribe a procedure for the county to remove a combined-use designation, including a designation that is removed as a result of the conclusion of the pilot program.
(3) In cooperation with the Department of Transportation, establish uniform specifications and symbols for signs, markers, and traffic control devices to control off-highway motor vehicles, including, but not limited to, the following:
(A) Devices to warn of dangerous conditions, obstacles, or hazards.
(B) Designations of the right-of-way for regular vehicular traffic and off-highway motor vehicles.
(C) A description of the nature and destination of the off-highway motor vehicle trail.
(D) Warning signs for pedestrians and motorists of the presence of off-highway motor vehicle traffic.
(4) Require that off-highway motor vehicles subject to the pilot project meet the safety requirements of federal and state law regarding proper drivers’ licensing, helmet usage, and the requirements pursuant to Section 38026.5.
(5) Prohibit off-highway motor vehicles from traveling faster than 35 miles per hour on highways designated under this section.
(6) (A) Prohibit a combined-use highway road segment designated under this section from exceeding 10 miles.
(B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), two or more combined-use highway road segments may share a common starting point or ending point and may partially overlap as long as the resulting network of the highway road segments does not include more than three distinct locations of shared starting or ending points, or both.
(7) Include an opportunity for public comment at a public hearing held by the county in order to evaluate the pilot project.
(c) A pilot project established pursuant to this section may include use of a state highway, subject to the approval of the Department of Transportation, or any crossing of a highway designated pursuant to Section 38025.
(d) (1) By selecting and designating a highway for combined use pursuant to this section, the county agrees to defend and indemnify the state against any and all claims, including legal defense and liability arising from a claim, for any safety-related losses or injuries arising or resulting from use by off-highway motor vehicles of a highway designated as a combined-use highway by the county’s board of supervisors pursuant to this section.
(2) This subdivision does not alter the requirements of subdivision (e).
(e) The county shall not designate a highway for combined use pursuant to this section unless the Commissioner of the Department of the California Highway Patrol finds that designating the highway for combined use would not create a potential traffic safety hazard.
(f) Not later than January 1, 2019, the County of Inyo, in consultation with the Department of the California Highway Patrol, the Department of Transportation, and the Department of Parks and Recreation, shall prepare and submit to the Legislature a report evaluating the pilot project, and containing all of the following:
(1) A description of the road segments designated to allow combined use for over three miles, as approved or adopted by a majority vote of the members of the Inyo County Board of Supervisors.
(2) An evaluation of the overall safety and effectiveness of the pilot project, including its impact on traffic flows, safety, off-highway vehicle usage on existing trails, incursions into areas not designated for off-highway vehicle usage, and nonmotorized recreation.
(3) A description of the public comments received at a public hearing held by the county in regards to an evaluation of the pilot project.
(g) (1) A report submitted pursuant to subdivision (f) shall be submitted in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code.
(2) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2020, and as of that date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 1, 2020, deletes or extends that date.
A_model:
The state of California is allowing the County of Inyo to establish a pilot project to designate certain county roads as combined-use highways for a maximum of 10 miles. The purpose of the project is to link existing off-highway motor vehicle trails and trailheads on federal Bureau of Land Management or United States Forest Service lands, and to link off-highway motor vehicle recreational-use areas with necessary service and lodging facilities. The project must follow certain procedures, including a vote by the county's board of supervisors, and must meet safety requirements regarding proper drivers' licensing, helmet usage, and other requirements. The county must also prohibit off-highway motor vehicles from traveling faster than 35 miles per hour on the designated highways. The pilot project must be revenue neutral to the state and no General Fund moneys can be expended for the project. The county must submit a report to the Legislature evaluating the pilot project by January 1, 2019, and the section will remain in effect only until January 1, 2020, unless extended by a later enacted statute.
A:
Existing law authorizes an off-highway motor vehicle that has been issued a plate or device to be operated or driven upon a highway under certain circumstances. Existing law authorizes various public entities, and the Director of Parks and Recreation, to designate a highway, or portion thereof, for the combined use of regular vehicular traffic and off-highway motor vehicles if certain requirements are met. Existing law prohibits a highway from being designated for this combined use for a distance of more than 3 miles.
Existing law, until January 1, 2017, authorizes the County of Inyo to establish a pilot project that would exempt specified combined-use highways in the unincorporated area in the County of Inyo from this prohibition to link together existing roads in the unincorporated portion of the county to existing trails and trailheads on federal Bureau of Land Management or United States Forest Service lands in order to provide a unified linkage of trail systems for off-highway motor vehicles, as prescribed. Existing law requires the County of Inyo, in consultation with the Department of the California Highway Patrol, the Department of Transportation, and the Department of Parks and Recreation, to prepare and submit to the Legislature a report evaluating the effectiveness of the pilot project by January 1, 2016, as specified.
This bill would extend the operation of these provisions until January 1, 2020, and would extend the reporting deadline until January 1, 2019. For purposes of the pilot project described above, the bill would prohibit a combined-use highway road segment from exceeding 10 miles, except as specified.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 10203.4 of the Insurance Code is amended to read:
10203.4.
(a) Insurance under a group life insurance policy issued pursuant to Sections 10202, 10202.8, 10203, 10203.1, and 10203.7 may be extended to insure the dependents, or any class or classes thereof, of each insured employee who so elects, in amounts in accordance with some plan that precludes individual selection and that shall not be in excess of 100 percent of the insurance on the life of the insured employee. For dependent children over the age of majority, the group policyholder may elect coverage at age variations up to the limiting age.
(b) “Dependent” includes the member’s spouse or a minor child, as well as a child older than the age of majority up to a maximum of 26 years of age, or any child over the age of majority who is both incapable of self-sustaining employment by reason of an intellectual disability or physical handicap and chiefly dependent upon the employee for support and maintenance if proof of the incapacity and dependency is furnished to the insurer by the employee within 31 days of the child’s attainment of the limiting age and subsequently as may be required by the insurer, but not more frequently than annually after the two-year period following the child’s attainment of the limiting age.
(c) The premiums for the insurance on the dependents may be paid by the employer, the employee, or the employer and the employee jointly.
SEC. 2.
Section 10271.1 of the Insurance Code is amended to read:
10271.1.
(a) (1) Supplemental benefits that operate to safeguard life insurance contracts against lapse are defined as a waiver of premium benefit or a waiver of monthly deduction benefit, as applicable, in which the insurer waives the premium or monthly deduction for a life insurance contract when the insured becomes totally disabled, as defined by the supplemental benefit, and where the waiver continues until the end of the insured’s disability, or for the period specified by the supplemental benefit, consistent with paragraph (5).
(2) For purposes of this subdivision, total disability shall not be less favorable to the insured than the following:
(A) During the first 24 months of total disability, the insured is unable to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material duties of his or her job due to sickness or bodily injury.
(B) After the first 24 months of total disability, the insured, due to sickness or bodily injury, is unable to engage with reasonable continuity in any other job in which he or she could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of his or her age, education, training, experience, station in life, or physical and mental capacity.
(3) The definition of total disability may also include presumptive total disability, such as the insured’s total and permanent loss of sight of both eyes, hearing of both ears, speech, the use of both hands, both feet, or one hand and one foot.
(4) The insurer may require total disability to continue for an uninterrupted period of time specified by the supplemental benefit, or the insurer may allow separate periods of disability to be combined.
(5) The waiver of premium or monthly deduction benefit shall continue for the period specified by the supplemental benefit, but shall not be less favorable to the insured than the following:
(A) If the insured’s total disability begins before the insured attains 60 years of age, the insurer shall waive all premiums or monthly deductions due for the period that the insured continues to be totally disabled, except as follows:
(i) For group life insurance policies, if the insured’s total disability begins before the insured attains 60 years of age, the insurer shall waive all premiums or monthly deductions due for the period of total disability up to 65 years of age. Nothing in this subdivision shall preclude the insurer from extending a supplemental benefit for longer periods.
(ii) When a renewal is offered for a group life insurance policy that was issued prior to January 1, 2017, and contains a supplemental benefit described in this subparagraph, the insurer shall offer to renew the policy with a continuation of the in-force supplemental benefit, and may concurrently offer the group policyholder the option to change the supplemental benefit as described in clause (i).
(B) If the insured’s total disability begins after the age specified in subparagraph (A), the insurer shall waive all premiums or monthly deductions due for the period that the insured continues to be totally disabled up to 65 years of age, except as follows:
(i) For group life insurance policies, if the insured’s total disability begins on or after the date the insured attains 60 years of age, the insurer is not required to waive premiums or monthly deductions. Nothing in this subdivision shall preclude the insurer from extending a supplemental benefit for longer periods.
(ii) When a renewal is offered for a group life insurance policy that was issued prior to January 1, 2017, and contains a supplemental benefit described in this subparagraph, the insurer shall offer to renew the policy with a continuation of the in-force supplemental benefit, and may concurrently offer the group policyholder the option to change the supplemental benefit as described in clause (i).
(6) In addition to the permissible exclusions listed in subdivision (g) of Section 10271, the insurer may exclude a total disability occurring after the policy anniversary or supplemental contract anniversary, as applicable and as defined by the supplemental benefit, on which the insured attains a specified age of no less than 65 years.
(b) “Special surrender benefit” is defined as a “waiver of surrender charge benefit” wherein the insurer waives the surrender charge usually charged for a withdrawal of funds from the cash value of a life insurance contract or the account value of an annuity contract if the owner, insured, or annuitant, as applicable, meets any of the following criteria:
(1) Develops any medical condition where the owner’s, insured’s, or annuitant’s life expectancy is expected to be less than or equal to a limited period of time that shall not be restricted to a period of less than 12 months or greater than 24 months.
(2) Is receiving, as prescribed by a physician, registered nurse, or licensed social worker, home care or community-based services, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 10232.9, or is confined in a skilled nursing facility, convalescent nursing home, or extended care facility, which shall not be defined more restrictively than as in the Medicare program, or is confined in a residential care facility or residential care facility for the elderly, as defined in the Health and Safety Code. Out-of-state providers of services shall be defined as comparable in licensure and staffing requirements to California providers.
(3) Has any medical condition that would, in the absence of treatment, result in death within a limited period of time, as defined by the supplemental benefit, but that shall not be restricted to a period of less than six months.
(4) Is totally disabled, as follows:
(A) During the first 24 months of total disability, the owner, insured, or annuitant, as applicable, is unable to perform with reasonable continuity the substantial and material duties of his or her job due to sickness or bodily injury.
(B) After the first 24 months of total disability, the owner, insured, or annuitant, as applicable, due to sickness or bodily injury, is unable to engage with reasonable continuity in any other job in which he or she could reasonably be expected to perform satisfactorily in light of his or her age, education, training, experience, station in life, or physical and mental capacity.
(C) The definition of total disability may also include presumptive total disability, such as the insured’s total and permanent loss of sight of both eyes, hearing of both ears, speech, the use of both hands, both feet, or one hand and one foot.
(D) The insurer may require the total disability to continue for an uninterrupted period of time specified by the supplemental benefit, or the insurer may allow separate periods of disability to be combined.
(5) Has a chronic illness as defined pursuant to either subparagraph (A) or (B):
(A) Either of the following:
(i) Impairment in performing two out of seven activities of daily living, as set forth in subdivisions (a) and (g) of Section 10232.8, meaning the insured needs human assistance, or needs continual substantial supervision.
(ii) The insured has an impairment of cognitive ability, meaning a deterioration or loss of intellectual capacity due to mental illness or disease, including Alzheimer’s disease or related illnesses, that requires continual supervision to protect oneself or others.
(B) Either of the following:
(i) Impairment in performing two out of six activities of daily living as described in subdivisions (b), (d), (e), and (f) of Section 10232.8 due to a loss of functional capacity to perform the activity.
(ii) Impairment of cognitive ability, meaning the insured needs substantial supervision due to severe cognitive impairment, as described in subdivisions (b), (d), and (e) of Section 10232.8.
(6) Has become involuntarily or voluntarily unemployed.
(c) The term “supplemental benefit” means a rider to or provision in a life insurance policy, certificate, or annuity contract that provides a benefit as set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 10271.
A_model:
The California Insurance Code has been amended to allow group life insurance policies to extend coverage to dependents of insured employees, up to a maximum of 100% of the insurance on the life of the insured employee. Dependents include the member's spouse or minor children, as well as children over the age of majority up to a maximum of 26 years of age, or any child over the age of majority who is incapable of self-sustaining employment due to an intellectual disability or physical handicap and is chiefly dependent on the employee for support and maintenance. The premiums for the insurance on dependents may be paid by the employer, the employee, or the employer and the employee jointly.

Additionally, the code has been amended to define "supplemental benefits" as waiver of premium or waiver of monthly deduction benefits, which operate to safeguard life insurance contracts against lapse. These benefits may include total disability benefits, such as the insured's total and permanent loss of sight of both eyes, hearing of both ears, speech, the use of both hands, both feet, or one hand and one foot. The waiver of premium or monthly deduction benefit shall continue for the period specified by the supplemental benefit, but shall not be less favorable to the insured than the definition of total disability provided in the code.
A:
Existing law provides for the regulation of specified insurance products, including group life insurance, by the Insurance Commissioner. Existing law provides that insurance under a group life insurance policy may be extended to insure the dependents of each insured employee under the group policy, as specified. Existing law defines a dependent for these purposes as including the employee’s spouse and all children from birth until 26 years of age, or a child 26 years of age or older who is both incapable of self-sustaining employment by reason of intellectual disability or physical handicap and chiefly dependent upon the employee for support and maintenance, as specified.
This bill would clarify that for dependent children over the age of majority the group policyholder would be authorized to elect coverage at age variations up to the limiting age.
Existing law defines a waiver of premium benefit or a waiver of monthly deduction benefit under a life insurance contract as a supplemental benefit that operates to safeguard a life insurance contract against lapse when the insured becomes totally disabled, as defined by the supplemental benefit, and continues until the end of the insured’s disability or the period specified by the supplemental benefit, consistent with specified restrictions. Existing law requires, if the insured’s total disability begins before the insured attains 60 years of age, the insurer to waive all premiums or monthly deductions due for the period that the insured continues to be totally disabled. Existing law requires, if the insured’s total disability begins when the insured is 60 years of age or older, the insurer to waive all premiums or monthly deductions due for the period that the insured continues to be totally disabled up to 65 years of age.
This bill would require an insurer, for an insured who becomes totally disabled before attaining 60 years of age and is covered by a group life insurance policy that includes a supplemental benefit, to waive all premiums or monthly deductions due for the period of total disability up to the time the insured attains 65 years of age. The bill would also permit an insurer to collect premiums or monthly deductions from an insured who becomes totally disabled on or after 60 years of age and is covered by a group life insurance policy that includes a supplemental benefit. The bill would require an insurer offering a renewal for a group life insurance policy issued prior to January 1, 2017, that contains a supplemental benefit to offer the employer a continuation of the in-force supplemental benefit, and would authorize the insurer to concurrently offer the group policyholder the option to change the supplemental benefit to either waive or collect premiums or monthly deductions as described above.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 296 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
296.
(a) The following persons shall provide buccal swab samples, right thumbprints, and a full palm print impression of each hand, and any blood specimens or other biological samples required pursuant to this chapter for law enforcement identification analysis:
(1) Any person, including any juvenile, who is convicted of or pleads guilty or no contest to any felony offense, or is found not guilty by reason of insanity of any felony offense, or any juvenile who is adjudicated under Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code for committing any felony offense.
(2) Any adult person who is arrested for or charged with any of the following felony offenses:
(A) Any felony offense specified in Section 290 or attempt to commit any felony offense described in Section 290, or any felony offense that imposes upon a person the duty to register in California as a sex offender under Section 290.
(B) Murder or voluntary manslaughter or any attempt to commit murder or voluntary manslaughter.
(C) Commencing on January 1 of the fifth year following enactment of the act that added this subparagraph, as amended, any adult person arrested or charged with any felony offense.
(3) Any person, including any juvenile, who is required to register under Section 290 or 457.1 because of the commission of, or the attempt to commit, a felony or misdemeanor offense, or any person, including any juvenile, who is housed in a mental health facility or sex offender treatment program after referral to such facility or program by a court after being charged with any felony offense.
(4) Any person, excluding a juvenile,
who has a prior misdemeanor conviction of Section 136.1, 136.5, 171b, or 186.28, subdivision (b), (c), or (d) of Section 243, Section 243.4, 244.5, 245, 245.5, 417, 417.6, 422, 646.9, or 25300, subdivision (d) of Section 26100, or Section 32625, and
who is convicted of, or pleads guilty or no contest to, any of the following offenses:
(A) A misdemeanor violation of Section 459.5.
(B) Any misdemeanor punishable pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 473.
(C) A violation of subdivision (a) of Section 476a that is punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 476a.
(D) A violation of Section 487 that is punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 490.2.
(E) A violation of Section 496 that is punishable as a misdemeanor.
(F) A misdemeanor violation of subdivision (a) of Section 11350 of the Health and Safety Code.
(G) A misdemeanor violation of subdivision (a) of Section 11357 of the Health and Safety Code.
(H) A misdemeanor violation of subdivision (a) of Section 11377 of the Health and Safety Code.
(I) A misdemeanor violation of Section 666.
(5) The term “felony” as used in this subdivision includes an attempt to commit the offense.
(6) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting collection and analysis of specimens, samples, or print impressions as a condition of a plea for nonqualifying offense.
(b) The provisions of this chapter and its requirements for submission of specimens, samples and print impressions as soon as administratively practicable shall apply to all qualifying persons regardless of sentence imposed, including any sentence of death, life without the possibility of parole, or any life or indeterminate term, or any other disposition rendered in the case of an adult or juvenile tried as an adult, or whether the person is diverted, fined, or referred for evaluation, and regardless of disposition rendered or placement made in the case of juvenile who is found to have committed any felony offense or is adjudicated under Section 602 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(c) The provisions of this chapter and its requirements for submission of specimens, samples, and print impressions as soon as administratively practicable by qualified persons as described in subdivision (a) shall apply regardless of placement or confinement in any mental hospital or other public or private treatment facility, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following persons, including juveniles:
(1) Any person committed to a state hospital or other treatment facility as a mentally disordered sex offender under Article 1 (commencing with Section 6300) of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of Division 6 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(2) Any person who has a severe mental disorder as set forth within the provisions of Article 4 (commencing with Section 2960) of Chapter 7 of Title 1 of Part 3 of the Penal Code.
(3) Any person found to be a sexually violent predator pursuant to Article 4 (commencing with Section 6600) of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of Division 6 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(d) The provisions of this chapter are mandatory and apply whether or not the court advises a person, including any juvenile, that he or she must provide the data bank and database specimens, samples, and print impressions as a condition of probation, parole, or any plea of guilty, no contest, or not guilty by reason of insanity, or any admission to any of the offenses described in subdivision (a).
(e) If at any stage of court proceedings the prosecuting attorney determines that specimens, samples, and print impressions required by this chapter have not already been taken from any person, as defined under subdivision (a) of Section 296, the prosecuting attorney shall notify the court orally on the record, or in writing, and request that the court order collection of the specimens, samples, and print impressions required by law. However, a failure by the prosecuting attorney or any other law enforcement agency to notify the court shall not relieve a person of the obligation to provide specimens, samples, and print impressions pursuant to this chapter.
(f) Prior to final disposition or sentencing in the case the court shall inquire and verify that the specimens, samples, and print impressions required by this chapter have been obtained and that this fact is included in the abstract of judgment or dispositional order in the case of a juvenile. The abstract of judgment issued by the court shall indicate that the court has ordered the person to comply with the requirements of this chapter and that the person shall be included in the state’s DNA and Forensic Identification Data Base and Data Bank program and be subject to this chapter.
However, failure by the court to verify specimen, sample, and print impression collection or enter these facts in the abstract of judgment or dispositional order in the case of a juvenile shall not invalidate an arrest, plea, conviction, or disposition, or otherwise relieve a person from the requirements of this chapter.
SEC. 2.
Section 299 of the Penal Code is amended to read:
299.
(a) A person whose DNA profile has been included in the data bank pursuant to this chapter shall have his or her DNA specimen and sample destroyed and searchable database profile expunged from the data bank program pursuant to the procedures set forth in subdivision (b) if the person has no past or present offense or pending charge which qualifies that person for inclusion within the state’s DNA and Forensic Identification Database and Data Bank Program and there otherwise is no legal basis for retaining the specimen or sample or searchable profile.
(b) Pursuant to subdivision (a), a person who has no past or present qualifying offense, and for whom there otherwise is no legal basis for retaining the specimen or sample or searchable profile, may make a written request to have his or her specimen and sample destroyed and searchable database profile expunged from the data bank program if:
(1) Following arrest, no accusatory pleading has been filed within the applicable period allowed by law charging the person with a qualifying offense as set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 296 or if the charges which served as the basis for including the DNA profile in the state’s DNA Database and Data Bank Identification Program have been dismissed prior to adjudication by a trier of fact;
(2) The underlying conviction or disposition serving as the basis for including the DNA profile has been reversed and the case dismissed;
(3) The person has been found factually innocent of the underlying offense pursuant to Section 851.8, or Section 781.5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code; or
(4) The defendant has been found not guilty or the defendant has been acquitted of the underlying offense.
(c) (1) The person requesting the data bank entry to be expunged must send a copy of his or her request to the trial court of the county where the arrest occurred, or that entered the conviction or rendered disposition in the case, to the DNA Laboratory of the Department of Justice, and to the prosecuting attorney of the county in which he or she was arrested or, convicted, or adjudicated, with proof of service on all parties. The court has the discretion to grant or deny the request for expungement. The denial of a request for expungement is a nonappealable order and shall not be reviewed by petition for writ.
(2) Except as provided below, the Department of Justice shall destroy a specimen and sample and expunge the searchable DNA database profile pertaining to the person who has no present or past qualifying offense of record upon receipt of a court order that verifies the applicant has made the necessary showing at a noticed hearing, and that includes all of the following:
(A) The written request for expungement pursuant to this section.
(B) A certified copy of the court order reversing and dismissing the conviction or case, or a letter from the district attorney certifying that no accusatory pleading has been filed or the charges which served as the basis for collecting a DNA specimen and sample have been dismissed prior to adjudication by a trier of fact, the defendant has been found factually innocent, the defendant has been found not guilty, the defendant has been acquitted of the underlying offense, or the underlying conviction has been reversed and the case dismissed.
(C) Proof of written notice to the prosecuting attorney and the Department of Justice that expungement has been requested.
(D) A court order verifying that no retrial or appeal of the case is pending, that it has been at least 180 days since the defendant or minor has notified the prosecuting attorney and the Department of Justice of the expungement request, and that the court has not received an objection from the Department of Justice or the prosecuting attorney.
(d) Upon order from the court, the Department of Justice shall destroy any specimen or sample collected from the person and any searchable DNA database profile pertaining to the person, unless the department determines that the person is subject to the provisions of this chapter because of a past qualifying offense of record or is or has otherwise become obligated to submit a blood specimen or buccal swab sample as a result of a separate arrest, conviction, juvenile adjudication, or finding of guilty or not guilty by reason of insanity for an offense described in subdivision (a) of Section 296, or as a condition of a plea.
The Department of Justice is not required to destroy analytical data or other items obtained from a blood specimen or saliva, or buccal swab sample, if evidence relating to another person subject to the provisions of this chapter would thereby be destroyed or otherwise compromised.
Any identification, warrant, probable cause to arrest, or arrest based upon a data bank or database match is not invalidated due to a failure to expunge or a delay in expunging records.
(e) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Department of Justice DNA Laboratory is not required to expunge DNA profile or forensic identification information or destroy or return specimens, samples, or print impressions taken pursuant to this section if the duty to register under Section 290 or 457.1 is terminated.
(f) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including Sections 17,
1170.18,
1203.4, and 1203.4a, a judge is not authorized to relieve a person of the separate administrative duty to provide specimens, samples, or print impressions required by this chapter if a person has been found guilty or was adjudicated a ward of the court by a trier of fact of a qualifying offense as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 296, or was found not guilty by reason of insanity or pleads no contest to a qualifying offense as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 296.
SEC. 2.
SEC. 3.
If the Commission on State Mandates determines that this act contains costs mandated by the state, reimbursement to local agencies and school districts for those costs shall be made pursuant to Part 7 (commencing with Section 17500) of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code.
A_model:
The article describes a new law in California that requires certain individuals to provide buccal swab samples, right thumbprints, and a full palm print impression for law enforcement identification analysis. The law applies to anyone who is convicted of a felony offense, arrested for or charged with certain felony offenses, required to register under Section 290 or 457.1 because of the commission of a felony or misdemeanor offense, or housed in a mental health facility or sex offender treatment program after being charged with a felony offense. The law also applies to anyone who has a prior misdemeanor conviction of certain offenses and is convicted of certain misdemeanor offenses. The provisions of the law are mandatory and apply regardless of sentence imposed, whether the person is diverted, fined, or referred for evaluation, and regardless of disposition rendered or placement made in the case of a juvenile. The law is intended to assist law enforcement in identifying and apprehending criminals and to provide a means of identifying and exonerating innocent individuals.
A:
Existing law, as amended by the DNA Act, requires a person who has been convicted of a felony offense to provide buccal swab samples, right thumbprints, and a full palm print impression of each hand, and any blood specimens or other biological samples required for law enforcement identification analysis. Existing law makes these provisions retroactive, regardless of when the crime charged or committed became a qualifying offense.
This bill would expand these provisions to require persons convicted of specified
misdemeanors, if they have a prior conviction of other specified misdemeanors,
misdemeanors
to provide buccal swab samples, right thumbprints, and a full palm print impression of each hand, and any blood specimens or other biological samples required for law enforcement identification analysis. By imposing additional duties on local law enforcement agencies to collect and forward these samples, this bill would impose a state-mandated local program.
Existing law prohibits a judge from relieving a person of the separate administrative duty to provide specimens, samples, or print impressions required by the DNA Act if the person has been found guilty of an offense for which DNA collection is required. Existing law, added by Proposition 47, allows a person to petition the court for resentencing if he or she was convicted of a felony that was reduced to a misdemeanor by Proposition 47. Existing law requires the court to resentence the petitioner, unless the court determines that the person would pose an unreasonable risk to public safety.
This bill would clarify that the prohibition on judges relieving a person of the duty to provide specimens, samples, or print impressions is not affected by resentencing under Proposition 47.
The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.
This bill would provide that, if the Commission on State Mandates determines that the bill contains costs mandated by the state, reimbursement for those costs shall be made pursuant to these statutory provisions.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 6601 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is amended to read:
6601.
(a) (1) Whenever the Secretary of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation determines that an individual who is in custody under the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, and who is either serving a determinate prison sentence or whose parole has been revoked, may be a sexually violent predator, the secretary shall, at least six months prior to that individual’s scheduled date for release from prison, refer the person for evaluation in accordance with this section. However, if the inmate was received by the department with less than nine months of his or her sentence to serve, or if the inmate’s release date is modified by judicial or administrative action, the secretary may refer the person for evaluation in accordance with this section at a date that is less than six months prior to the inmate’s scheduled release date.
(2) A petition may be filed under this section if the individual was in custody pursuant to his or her determinate prison term, parole revocation term, or a hold placed pursuant to Section 6601.3, at the time the petition is filed. A petition shall not be dismissed on the basis of a later judicial or administrative determination that the individual’s custody was unlawful, if the unlawful custody was the result of a good faith mistake of fact or law. This paragraph shall apply to any petition filed on or after January 1, 1996.
(b) The person shall be screened by the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation and the Board of Parole Hearings based on whether the person has committed a sexually violent predatory offense and on a review of the person’s social, criminal, and institutional history. This screening shall be conducted in accordance with a structured screening instrument developed and updated by the State Department of State Hospitals in consultation with the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation. If as a result of this screening it is determined that the person is likely to be a sexually violent predator, the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation shall refer the person to the State Department of State Hospitals for a full evaluation of whether the person meets the criteria in Section 6600.
(c)
(1)
The State Department of State Hospitals shall evaluate the person in accordance with a standardized assessment protocol, developed and updated by the State Department of State Hospitals, to determine whether the person is a sexually violent predator as defined in this article. The standardized assessment protocol shall require assessment of diagnosable mental disorders, as well as various factors known to be associated with the risk of reoffense among sex offenders. Risk factors to be considered shall include criminal and psychosexual history, type, degree, and duration of sexual deviance, and severity of mental disorder.
(2) On or before January 30, 2016, the State Department of State Hospitals shall consult with a committee consisting of one representative from each of the State Department of State Hospitals, the California District Attorneys Association, the California Public Defenders Association, and the Los Angeles District Attorney’s Office. The committee members shall select a member of the private defense bar and a person with experience as an evaluator under Article 4 (commencing with Section 6600) of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of Division 6 to make recommendations regarding possible changes to the standardized assessment protocol, as described in paragraph (3).
(3) On or before March 1, 2016, the State Department of State Hospitals shall initiate the regulatory process to update the standardized assessment protocol, including a plan for formal supervisory review of evaluations and a checklist for reviewing evaluations, as recommended by the March 2015 report of the California State Auditor. The regulations shall also include requirements and procedures for training evaluators.
(d) Pursuant to subdivision (c), the person shall be evaluated by two practicing psychiatrists or psychologists, or one practicing psychiatrist and one practicing psychologist, designated by the Director of State Hospitals. If both evaluators concur that the person has a diagnosed mental disorder so that he or she is likely to engage in acts of sexual violence without appropriate treatment and custody, the Director of State Hospitals shall forward a request for a petition for commitment under Section 6602 to the county designated in subdivision (i). Copies of the evaluation reports and any other supporting documents shall be made available to the attorney designated by the county pursuant to subdivision (i) who may file a petition for commitment.
(e) If one of the professionals performing the evaluation pursuant to subdivision (d) does not concur that the person meets the criteria specified in subdivision (d), but the other professional concludes that the person meets those criteria, the Director of State Hospitals shall arrange for further examination of the person by two independent professionals selected in accordance with subdivision (g).
(f) If an examination by independent professionals pursuant to subdivision (e) is conducted, a petition to request commitment under this article shall only be filed if both independent professionals who evaluate the person pursuant to subdivision (e) concur that the person meets the criteria for commitment specified in subdivision (d). The professionals selected to evaluate the person pursuant to subdivision (g) shall inform the person that the purpose of their examination is not treatment but to determine if the person meets certain criteria to be involuntarily committed pursuant to this article. It is not required that the person appreciate or understand that information.
(g) Any independent professional who is designated by the Secretary of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation or the Director of State Hospitals for purposes of this section shall not be a state government employee, shall have at least five years of experience in the diagnosis and treatment of mental disorders, and shall include psychiatrists and licensed psychologists who have a doctoral degree in psychology. The requirements set forth in this section also shall apply to any professionals appointed by the court to evaluate the person for purposes of any other proceedings under this article.
(h) If the State Department of State Hospitals determines that the person is a sexually violent predator as defined in this article, the Director of State Hospitals shall forward a request for a petition to be filed for commitment under this article to the county designated in subdivision (i). Copies of the evaluation reports and any other supporting documents shall be made available to the attorney designated by the county pursuant to subdivision (i) who may file a petition for commitment in the superior court.
(i) If the county’s designated counsel concurs with the recommendation, a petition for commitment shall be filed in the superior court of the county in which the person was convicted of the offense for which he or she was committed to the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation. The petition shall be filed, and the proceedings shall be handled, by either the district attorney or the county counsel of that county. The county board of supervisors shall designate either the district attorney or the county counsel to assume responsibility for proceedings under this article.
(j) The time limits set forth in this section shall not apply during the first year that this article is operative.
(k) An order issued by a judge pursuant to Section 6601.5, finding that the petition, on its face, supports a finding of probable cause to believe that the individual named in the petition is likely to engage in sexually violent predatory criminal behavior upon his or her release, shall toll that person’s parole pursuant to paragraph (4) of subdivision (a) of Section 3000 of the Penal Code, if that individual is determined to be a sexually violent predator.
(l) Pursuant to subdivision (d), the attorney designated by the county pursuant to subdivision (i) shall notify the State Department of State Hospitals of its decision regarding the filing of a petition for commitment within 15 days of making that decision.
(m) This section shall become operative on the date that the director executes a declaration, which shall be provided to the fiscal and policy committees of the Legislature, including the Chairperson of the Joint Legislative Budget Committee, and the Department of Finance, specifying that sufficient qualified state employees have been hired to conduct the evaluations required pursuant to subdivision (d), or January 1, 2013, whichever occurs first.
SECTION 1.
SEC. 2.
Section 6604.9 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is amended to read:
6604.9.
(a) A person found to be a sexually violent predator and committed to the custody of the State Department of State Hospitals shall have a current examination of his or her mental condition made at least once every year. The report shall be in the form of a declaration and shall be prepared by a professionally qualified person. The report shall also be signed by the Director of the State Department of State Hospitals. The person may retain or, if he or she is indigent and so requests, the court may appoint, a qualified expert or professional person to examine him or her, and the expert or professional person shall have access to all records concerning the person.
(b) The annual report shall include consideration of whether the committed person currently meets the definition of a sexually violent predator and whether conditional release to a less restrictive alternative, pursuant to Section 6608, or an unconditional discharge, pursuant to Section 6605, is in the best interest of the person and conditions can be imposed that would adequately protect the community.
(c) The State Department of State Hospitals shall file this periodic report with the court that committed the person under this article. A copy of the report shall be served on the prosecuting agency involved in the initial commitment and upon the committed person.
(d) If the State Department of State Hospitals determines that either: (1) the person’s condition has so changed that the person no longer meets the definition of a sexually violent predator and should, therefore, be considered for unconditional discharge, or (2) conditional release to a less restrictive alternative is in the best interest of the person and conditions can be imposed that adequately protect the community, the director shall authorize the person to petition the court for conditional release to a less restrictive alternative or for an unconditional discharge. The petition shall be filed with the court and served upon the prosecuting agency responsible for the initial commitment.
(e) The court, upon receipt of the petition for conditional release to a less restrictive alternative, shall consider the petition using procedures described in Section 6608.
(f) The court, upon receiving a petition for unconditional discharge, shall order a show cause hearing, pursuant to the provisions of Section 6605, at which the court may consider the petition and any accompanying documentation provided by the medical director, the prosecuting attorney, or the committed person.
SEC. 3.
Section 6610 is added to the Welfare and Institutions Code, to read:
6610.
(a) (1) There is hereby created an oversight board that shall advise the Legislature and the Governor regarding sexually violent predators under Article 4 (commencing with Section 6600) of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of Division 6.
(2) The board shall be comprised of seven members. Each of the following organizations shall select one representative to serve on the oversight board: The State Department of State Hospitals, the California District Attorneys Association, the California Public Defenders Association, the Los Angeles District Attorney’s Office, and the California Judicial Commission on Judicial Performance.
(3) The board members selected pursuant to paragraph (2) shall select both a representative of the private defense bar and a person with experience as an evaluator under Article 4 (commencing with Section 6600) of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of Division 6 to serve on the oversight board.
(b) (1) The oversight board shall meet at least six times per year.
(2) On or before January 1, 2017, and on or before January 1 in each subsequent year, the oversight board shall make a report to the Governor and the Legislature making recommendations relating to implementation of Article 4 (commencing with Section 6600) of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of Division 6, including, but not limited to, evaluating sexually violent predators in state hospitals.
(3) The report required pursuant to paragraph (2) shall be submitted to the Legislature in compliance with subdivision (c) of Section 9795 of the Government Code.
A_model:
The article describes the process for evaluating and potentially committing individuals who are determined to be sexually violent predators in the state of California. The process involves the Secretary of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation referring individuals for evaluation by the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation and the Board of Parole Hearings, who will determine if the individual has committed a sexually violent predator offense and if they meet the criteria for evaluation as a sexually violent predator. The State Department of State Hospitals will then evaluate the individual using a standardized assessment protocol, which includes assessing diagnosable mental disorders and various risk factors associated with sex offenders. If the individual is determined to be a sexually violent predator, the State Department of State Hospitals will forward a request for a petition for commitment under Section 6602 to the county designated in the article. The article also outlines the requirements and procedures for training evaluators and the composition and responsibilities of an oversight board that will advise the Legislature and Governor regarding sexually violent predators.
A:
Existing law provides for the civil commitment of criminal offenders who have been determined to be sexually violent predators for treatment in a secure state hospital facility, as specified. Existing law requires the Secretary of the Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation to refer a prisoner for evaluation by the State Department of State Hospitals when the secretary determines that the person may be a sexually violent predator,
requires the State Department of State Hospitals to evaluate the person in accordance with a standardized assessment protocol, as specified, to determine whether the person is a sexually violent predator,
and specifies the judicial processes necessary for civil commitment as a sexually violent predator, including, but not limited to, the right to a jury trial.
Existing
This bill would require the State Department of State Hospitals to consult, on or before January 30, 2016, with a committee comprised of representatives of specified organizations to make recommendations regarding possible changes to the standardized assessment protocol. The bill would require the State Department of State Hospitals, on or before March 1, 2016, to initiate the regulatory process to update the standardized assessment protocol, as specified.
Existing
law requires an annual examination of the mental condition of a sexually violent predator to determine whether conditional release to a less restrictive alternative or unconditional release is in the best interest of the person and the conditions imposed would adequately protect the community. Existing law requires that the report be in the form of a declaration and prepared by a professionally qualified person.
Proposition 83, enacted by the voters at the November 7, 2006, statewide general election, made various changes to the sexually violent predator civil commitment process.
Proposition 83 permits the Legislature to amend its provisions, either by a
2
3
vote of the membership of each house, or by a majority vote of the membership of each house if the amendments expand the scope of the application of the provisions of the proposition or increase the punishments or penalties provided in the proposition.
This bill would require the report described above to be signed by the Director of the State Department of State Hospitals.
By amending the requirements for the report, this bill would amend Proposition 83.
The bill would also create a 7-member oversight board to advise the Governor and the Legislature regarding the civil commitment of sexually violent predators comprised of representatives selected by the State Department of State Hospitals and other organizations, as specified. The bill would require the oversight board to meet at least 6 times per year and, beginning January 1, 2017, to make an annual report to the Governor and the Legislature including the board’s recommendations, as specified.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 8263 of the Education Code is amended to read:
8263.
(a) The Superintendent shall adopt rules and regulations on eligibility, enrollment, and priority of services needed to implement this chapter. In order to be eligible for federal and state subsidized child development services, families shall meet at least one requirement in each of the following areas:
(1) A family is (A) a current aid recipient, (B) income eligible, (C) homeless, or (D) one whose children are recipients of protective services, or whose children have been identified as being abused, neglected, or exploited, or at risk of being abused, neglected, or exploited.
(2) A family needs the child care services (A) because the child is identified by a legal, medical, or social services agency, a local educational agency liaison for homeless children and youths designated pursuant to Section 11432(g)(1)(J)(ii) of Title 42 of the United States Code, a Head Start program, or an emergency or transitional shelter as (i) a recipient of protective services, (ii) being neglected, abused, or exploited, or at risk of neglect, abuse, or exploitation, or (iii) being homeless or (B) because the parents are (i) engaged in vocational training leading directly to a recognized trade, paraprofession, or profession, (ii) employed or seeking employment, (iii) seeking permanent housing for family stability, or (iv) incapacitated.
(b) Except as provided in Article 15.5 (commencing with Section 8350), priority for federal and state subsidized child development services is as follows:
(1) (A) First priority shall be given to neglected or abused children who are recipients of child protective services, or children who are at risk of being neglected or abused, upon written referral from a legal, medical, or social services agency. If an agency is unable to enroll a child in the first priority category, the agency shall refer the family to local resource and referral services to locate services for the child.
(B) A family who is receiving child care on the basis of being a child at risk of abuse, neglect, or exploitation, as defined in subdivision (k) of Section 8208, is eligible to receive services pursuant to subparagraph (A) for up to three months, unless the family becomes eligible pursuant to subparagraph (C).
(C) A family may receive child care services for up to 12 months on the basis of a certification by the county child welfare agency that child care services continue to be necessary or, if the child is receiving child protective services during that period of time, and the family requires child care and remains otherwise eligible. This time limit does not apply if the family’s child care referral is recertified by the county child welfare agency.
(2) Second priority shall be given equally to eligible families, regardless of the number of parents in the home, who are income eligible. Within this priority, families with the lowest gross monthly income in relation to family size, as determined by a schedule adopted by the Superintendent, shall be admitted first. If two or more families are in the same priority in relation to income, the family that has a child with exceptional needs shall be admitted first. If there is no family of the same priority with a child with exceptional needs, the same priority family that has been on the waiting list for the longest time shall be admitted first. For purposes of determining order of admission, the grants of public assistance recipients shall be counted as income.
(3) The Superintendent shall set criteria for, and may grant specific waivers of, the priorities established in this subdivision for agencies that wish to serve specific populations, including children with exceptional needs or children of prisoners. These new waivers shall not include proposals to avoid appropriate fee schedules or admit ineligible families, but may include proposals to accept members of special populations in other than strict income order, as long as appropriate fees are paid.
(c) Notwithstanding any other law, in order to promote continuity of services, a family enrolled in a state or federally funded child care and development program whose services would otherwise be terminated because the family no longer meets the program income, eligibility, or need criteria may continue to receive child development services in another state or federally funded child care and development program if the contractor is able to transfer the family’s enrollment to another program for which the family is eligible before the date of termination of services or to exchange the family’s existing enrollment with the enrollment of a family in another program, provided that both families satisfy the eligibility requirements for the program in which they are being enrolled. The transfer of enrollment may be to another program within the same administrative agency or to another agency that administers state or federally funded child care and development programs.
(d) In order to promote continuity of services, the Superintendent may extend the 60-working-day period specified in subdivision (a) of Section 18086.5 of Title 5 of the California Code of Regulations for an additional 60 working days if he or she determines that opportunities for employment have diminished to the degree that one or both parents cannot reasonably be expected to find employment within 60 working days and granting the extension is in the public interest. The scope of extensions granted pursuant to this subdivision shall be limited to the necessary geographic areas and affected persons, which shall be described in the Superintendent’s order granting the extension. It is the intent of the Legislature that extensions granted pursuant to this subdivision improve services in areas with high unemployment rates and areas with disproportionately high numbers of seasonal agricultural jobs.
(e) A physical examination and evaluation, including age-appropriate immunization, shall be required before, or within six weeks of, enrollment. A standard, rule, or regulation shall not require medical examination or immunization for admission to a child care and development program of a child whose parent or guardian files a letter with the governing board of the child care and development program stating that the medical examination or immunization is contrary to his or her religious beliefs, or provide for the exclusion of a child from the program because of a parent or guardian having filed the letter. However, if there is good cause to believe that a child is suffering from a recognized contagious or infectious disease, the child shall be temporarily excluded from the program until the governing board of the child care and development program is satisfied that the child is not suffering from that contagious or infectious disease.
(f) Regulations formulated and promulgated pursuant to this section shall include the recommendations of the State Department of Health Care Services relative to health care screening and the provision of health care services. The Superintendent shall seek the advice and assistance of these health authorities in situations where service under this chapter includes or requires care of children who are ill or children with exceptional needs.
(g) The Superintendent shall establish guidelines for the collection of employer-sponsored child care benefit payments from a parent whose child receives subsidized child care and de
A_model:
The article describes the rules and regulations for eligibility, enrollment, and priority of services for federal and state subsidized child development services in California. Families must meet at least one requirement in each of the following areas to be eligible for the services: being a current aid recipient, income eligible, homeless, or having children who are recipients of protective services or at risk of being abused, neglected, or exploited. Priority for the services is given to neglected or abused children who are recipients of child protective services, or children who are at risk of being neglected or abused, upon written referral from a legal, medical, or social services agency. Second priority is given to eligible families who are income eligible, with the lowest gross monthly income in relation to family size being admitted first. The Superintendent may set criteria and grant specific waivers for the priorities established in this section for agencies that wish to serve specific populations, including children with exceptional needs or children of prisoners. The article also states that in order to promote continuity of services, a family enrolled in a state or federally funded child care and development program whose services would otherwise be terminated because the family no longer meets the program income, eligibility, or need criteria may continue to receive child development services in another state or federally funded child care and development program if the contractor is able to transfer the family’s enrollment to another program for which the family is eligible before the date of termination of services or to exchange the family’s existing enrollment with the enrollment of a family in another program.
A:
Existing law requires the Superintendent of Public Instruction to adopt rules and regulations on eligibility, enrollment, and priority of services needed to implement laws relating to child care and development services. Existing law requires families to meet certain requirements in order to be eligible for subsidized child development services, including that the family needs child care services because the child is identified by a legal, medical, or social services agency, or emergency shelter as being a recipient of a protective service or being neglected, abused, or exploited, as provided.
This bill would expand the list of entities that can identify a child in need to include a local educational agency liaison for homeless children and youths, a Head Start program, or a transitional shelter. The bill would expand the list of children to be identified to include a homeless child.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
This act shall be known, and may be cited, as the Equal Pay for Equal Work Act of 2015.
SEC. 2.
(a) The Legislature finds and declares the following:
(1) According to data from the United States Census Bureau, full-time working women, on average, over the last decade, have continued to earn just 77 cents for every dollar a man earns. The wage gap is greater for women of color, with African American women being paid an average of 64 cents for every dollar paid to white, non-Hispanic men in 2013 and Latinas being paid just 56 cents for every dollar paid to white, non-Hispanic men.
(2) This wage disparity amounted to a yearly average wage gap of $10,876 in 2013 between full-time working men and full-time working women. In total, the disparity represents more than $490 billion in lost wages for working women every year.
(3) Disparities in pay for women have numerous negative impacts. This pay differential shortchanges women and their families by thousands of dollars a year and potentially hundreds of thousands of dollars over a lifetime. Nearly 4 in 10 mothers are primary breadwinners in their households, and nearly two-thirds are significant earners, making pay equity critical to the economic security of their families.
(4) Equal pay for equal work is a fundamental precept in our nation and in California. Federal law, including the federal Equal Pay Act of 1963 (Public Law 88-38), Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Public Law 88-352), and Executive Order 11246 of September 24, 1965, entitled Equal Employment Opportunity, specifically prohibits arbitrarily compensating men and women differently for the same work, as does California’s Equal Pay Act.
(5) On August 6, 2014, the United States Department of Labor’s Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs issued a notice of proposed rulemaking to required covered federal contractors and subcontractors with more than 100 employees to submit an annual equal pay report on employee compensation. In California, state contractors receiving public money are obligated to comply with equal pay laws and should provide the state with aggregate wage data to advance pay equity.
(b) It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting this act to promote pay equity and nondiscrimination in setting pay and making hiring or promotional decisions, and to obtain better data on pay equity to more wholly address the problem.
SEC. 3.
Section 12990 of the Government Code is amended to read:
12990.
(a) Any employer who is, or wishes to become, a contractor with the state for public works or for goods or services is subject to the provisions of this part relating to discrimination in employment and to the nondiscrimination requirements of this section and any rules and regulations that implement it.
(b) (1) (A) (i) Prior to becoming a contractor or subcontractor with the state, an employer with 100 or more employees in the state and a contract of 30 days or more shall submit a nondiscrimination program to the department and shall submit periodic reports, no more than annually, of its compliance with that program. An employer with fewer than 100 employees in the state or a contract of less than 30 days may be required to submit a nondiscrimination program and, if so required, shall comply with the requirements for employers with 100 or more employees in the state. The department may require approval and certification of a nondiscrimination program. The department shall define an employee for the purposes of this paragraph.
(ii) An employee in the construction industry covered by a valid collective bargaining agreement that expressly provides for the wages, hours of work, and working conditions of employees, premium wage rates for all overtime worked, and regular hourly pay of not less than 30 percent of the state minimum wage rate shall be excluded from calculation of the employer’s total number of employees for purposes of this subparagraph.
(B) The changes made to this subdivision made by the act adding this subparagraph shall not be construed to negate an exemption to the requirements of this section in existence on January 1, 2016, created by the department through the exercise of its regulatory authority, or to otherwise require the department to reinterpret the validity of an exemption as a result of these changes.
(2) A nondiscrimination program shall include policies and procedures designed to ensure equal employment opportunities for all applicants and employees, an analysis of employment selection procedures, and a workforce analysis. The workforce analysis shall include the following:
(A) The total number of workers with a specific job category identified by worker race, ethnicity, and sex.
(B) Total wages required to be reported on Internal Revenue Service Form W-2 for all workers in a specific job category identified by worker race, ethnicity, and sex.
(C) The total hours worked on an annual basis for all workers in a specific job category identified by worker race, ethnicity, and sex. Exempt employees shall be presumed to work 40 hours a week for purposes of this reporting requirement.
(c) Every state contract and subcontract for public works or for goods or services shall contain a nondiscrimination clause prohibiting discrimination on the bases enumerated in this part by contractors or subcontractors. The nondiscrimination clause shall contain a provision requiring contractors and subcontractors to give written notice of their obligations under that clause to labor organizations with which they have a collective bargaining or other agreement. These contractual provisions shall be fully and effectively enforced. This subdivision does not apply to a credit card purchase of goods of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) or less. The total amount of exemption authorized herein shall not exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500) per year for each company from which a state agency is purchasing goods by credit card. It shall be the responsibility of each state agency to monitor the use of this exemption and adhere to these restrictions on these purchases.
(d) The department shall periodically develop rules and regulations for the application and implementation of this section, and submit them to the council for consideration and adoption in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1. Those rules and regulations shall describe and include, but not be limited to, all of the following:
(1) Procedures for the investigation, approval, certification, decertification, monitoring, and enforcement of nondiscrimination programs.
(2) The size of contracts or subcontracts below which any particular provision of this section shall not apply.
(3) The circumstances, if any, under which a contractor or subcontractor is not subject to this section.
(4) Criteria for determining the appropriate plant, region, division, or other unit of a contractor’s or subcontractor’s operation for which a nondiscrimination program is required.
(5) Procedures for coordinating the nondiscrimination requirements of this section and its implementing rules and regulations with the California Plan for Equal Opportunity in Apprenticeship, with the provisions and implementing regulations of Article 9.5 (commencing with Section 11135) of Chapter 1 of Part 1, and with comparable federal laws and regulations concerning nondiscrimination, equal employment opportunity, and affirmative action by those who contract with the United States.
(6) The basic principles and standards to guide the department in administering and implementing this section.
(e) Where a contractor or subcontractor is required to prepare an affirmative action, equal employment, or nondiscrimination program subject to review and approval by a federal compliance agency, that program may be filed with the department, instead of any nondiscrimination program regularly required by this section or its implementing rules and regulations. Such a program shall constitute a prima facie demonstration of compliance with this section. Where the department or a federal compliance agency has required the preparation of an affirmative action, equal employment, or nondiscrimination program subject to review and approval by the department or a federal compliance agency, evidence of such a program shall also constitute prima facie compliance with an ordinance or regulation of any city, city and county, or county that requires an employer to submit such a program to a local awarding agency for its approval prior to becoming a contractor or subcontractor with that agency.
(f) Where the department determines and certifies that the provisions of this section or its implementing rules and regulations are violated or determines a contractor or subcontractor is engaging in practices made unlawful under this part, the department may recommend appropriate sanctions to the awarding agency. Any such recommendation shall take into account the severity of the violation or violations and any other penalties, sanctions, or remedies previously imposed.
A_model:
California has passed the Equal Pay for Equal Work Act of 2015, which aims to promote pay equity and nondiscrimination in setting pay and making hiring or promotional decisions. The act requires state contractors receiving public money to comply with equal pay laws and submit aggregate wage data to the state. The act also requires employers with 100 or more employees and a contract of 30 days or more to submit a nondiscrimination program to the state department and periodic reports of compliance with that program. The nondiscrimination program must include policies and procedures to ensure equal employment opportunities, an analysis of employment selection procedures, and a workforce analysis that includes the total number of workers by job category, total wages, and total hours worked by race, ethnicity, and sex. The act also prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, gender, sexual orientation, and other characteristics in public works, goods, and services contracts.
A:
Existing law subjects an employer who is, or wishes to become, a contractor with the state for public works, or for goods or services, to various nondiscrimination requirements. Existing law authorizes requiring an employer to submit a nondiscrimination program to the Department of Fair Employment and Housing for approval and certification, prior to becoming a contractor or subcontractor with the state, as well as requiring the provision of periodic reports of contractor or subcontractor compliance with that program.
This bill would enact the Equal Pay for Equal Work Act of 2015. The bill would require an employer with 100 or more employees in state, as specified, and a contract of 30 days or more, prior to becoming a contractor or subcontractor with the state, to submit a nondiscrimination program to the Department of Fair Employment and Housing and to submit periodic reports no more than annually of its compliance with that program. The bill would authorize the department to require approval and certification of the program. The bill would permit the department to require an employer with fewer than 100 employees in state or a contract of less than 30 days to submit a nondiscrimination report. The bill would require the department to define an employee for these purposes. The bill would require the nondiscrimination program to include policies and procedures designed to ensure equal employment opportunities for all applicants and employees, an analysis of employment selection procedures, and a workforce analysis, as specified. The bill would specify that its provisions are not to be construed to negate certain exemptions established by regulation that predate its enactment or to require the department to reevaluate the validity of these exemptions, as specified. The bill would make a statement of legislative findings.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Chapter 2.55 (commencing with Section 1000.7) is added to Title 6 of Part 2 of the Penal Code, to read:
CHAPTER  2.55. Deferred Entry of Judgment Pilot Program
1000.7.
(a) The following counties may establish a pilot program pursuant to this section to operate a deferred entry of judgment pilot program for eligible defendants described in subdivision (b):
(1) County of Alameda.
(2) County of Butte.
(3) County of Napa.
(4) County of Nevada.
(5) County of Santa Clara.
(b) A defendant may participate in a deferred entry of judgment pilot program within the county’s juvenile hall if that person is charged with committing a felony offense, other than the offenses listed under subdivision (d), he or she pleads guilty to the charge or charges, and the probation department determines that the person meets all of the following requirements:
(1) Is 18 years of age or older, but under 21 years of age on the date the offense was committed.
(2) Is suitable for the program after evaluation using a risk assessment tool, as described in subdivision (c).
(3) Shows the ability to benefit from services generally reserved for delinquents, including, but not limited to, cognitive behavioral therapy, other mental health services, and age-appropriate educational, vocational, and supervision services, that are currently deployed under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court.
(4) Meets the rules of the juvenile hall developed in accordance with the applicable regulations set forth in Title 15 of the California Code of Regulations.
(5) Does not have a prior or current conviction for committing an offense listed under subdivision (c) of Section 1192.7 or subdivision (c) of Section 667.5, or subdivision (b) of Section 707 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(6) Is not required to register as a sex offender pursuant to Chapter 5.5 (commencing with Section 290) of Title 9 of Part 1.
(c) The probation department, in consultation with the superior court, district attorney, and sheriff of the county or the governmental body charged with operating the county jail, shall develop an evaluation process using a risk assessment tool to determine eligibility for the program.
(d) If the defendant is required to register as a sex offender pursuant to Chapter 5.5 (commencing with Section 290) of Title 9 of Part 1, or if he or she has been convicted of one or more of the following offenses, he or she is not eligible for the program:
(1) An offense listed under subdivision (c) of Section 1192.7.
(2) An offense listed under subdivision (c) of Section 667.5.
(3) An offense listed under subdivision (b) of Section 707 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.
(e) The court shall grant deferred entry of judgment if an eligible defendant consents to participate in the program, waives his or her right to a speedy trial or a speedy preliminary hearing, pleads guilty to the charge or charges, and waives time for the pronouncement of judgment.
(f) (1) If the probation department determines that the defendant is not eligible for the deferred entry of judgment pilot program or the defendant does not consent to participate in the program, the proceedings shall continue as in any other case.
(2) If it appears to the probation department that the defendant is performing unsatisfactorily in the program as a result of the commission of a new crime or the violation of any of the rules of the juvenile hall or that the defendant is not benefiting from the services in the program, the probation department may make a motion for entry of judgment. After notice to the defendant, the court shall hold a hearing to determine whether judgment should be entered. If the court finds that the defendant is performing unsatisfactorily in the program or that the defendant is not benefiting from the services in the program, the court shall render a finding of guilt to the charge or charges pleaded, enter judgment, and schedule a sentencing hearing as otherwise provided in this code, and the probation department, in consultation with the county sheriff, shall remove the defendant from the program and return him or her to custody in county jail. The mechanism of when and how the defendant is moved from custody in juvenile hall to custody in a county jail shall be determined by the local multidisciplinary team specified in paragraph (2) of subdivision (m).
(3) If the defendant has performed satisfactorily during the period in which deferred entry of judgment was granted, at the end of that period, the court shall dismiss the criminal charge or charges.
(g) A defendant shall serve no longer than one year in custody within a county’s juvenile hall pursuant to the program.
(h) The probation department shall develop a plan for reentry services, including, but not limited to, housing, employment, and education services, as a component of the program.
(i) The probation department shall submit data relating to the effectiveness of the program to the Division of Recidivism Reduction and Re-Entry, within the Department of Justice, including recidivism rates for program participants as compared to recidivism rates for similar populations in the adult system within the county.
(j) A defendant participating in the program pursuant to this section shall not come into contact with minors within the juvenile hall for any purpose, including, but not limited to, housing, recreation, or education.
(k) Prior to establishing a pilot program pursuant to this section, the county shall apply to the Board of State and Community Corrections for approval of a county institution as a suitable place for confinement for the purpose of the pilot program. The board shall review and approve or deny the application of the county within 30 days of receiving notice of this proposed use. In its review, the board shall take into account the available programming, capacity, and safety of the institution as a place for the confinement and rehabilitation of individuals within the jurisdiction of the criminal court, and those within the jurisdiction of the juvenile court.
(l) The Board of State and Community Corrections shall review a county’s pilot program to ensure compliance with requirements of the federal Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Sec. 5601 et seq.), as amended, relating to “sight and sound” separation between juveniles and adult inmates.
(m) (1) This section applies to a defendant who would otherwise serve time in custody in a county jail. Participation in a program pursuant to this section shall not be authorized as an alternative to a sentence involving community supervision.
(2) Each county shall establish a multidisciplinary team that shall meet periodically to review and discuss the implementation, practices, and impact of the program. The team shall include representatives from the following:
(A) Probation department.
(B) The district attorney’s office.
(C) The public defender’s office.
(D) The sheriff’s department.
(E) Courts located in the county.
(F) The county board of supervisors.
(G) The county health and human services department.
(H) A youth advocacy group.
(n) (1) A county that establishes a pilot program pursuant to this section shall submit data regarding the pilot program to the Board of State and Community Corrections. The data submitted shall be used for the purposes of paragraph (2).
(2) The board shall conduct an evaluation of the pilot program’s impact and effectiveness. The evaluation shall include, but not be limited to, evaluating each pilot program’s impact on sentencing and impact on opportunities for community supervision, monitoring the program’s effect on minors in the juvenile facility, if any, and its effectiveness with respect to program participants, including outcome-related data for program participants compared to young adult offenders sentenced for comparable crimes.
(3) Each evaluation shall be combined into a comprehensive report and submitted to the Assembly and Senate Committees on Public Safety.
(4) The board may contract with an independent entity, including, but not limited to, the Regents of the University of California, for the purposes of carrying out the duties of the board pursuant to this subdivision.
(o) This chapter shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2020, and as of that date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 1, 2020, deletes or extends that date.
SEC. 2.
The Legislature finds and declares that a special law is necessary and that a general law cannot be made applicable within the meaning of Section 16 of Article IV of the California Constitution because of the unique circumstances in the Counties of Alameda, Butte, Napa, Nevada, and Santa Clara. Recent research on the adolescent brain development has found that brain development continues well after an individual reaches 18 years of age. This bill would therefore allow for the criminal justice system to apply the most recent brain development research to its practices in these counties by allowing certain transitional age youth access to age-appropriate rehabilitative services available in the juvenile justice system when an assessment determines that the individual would benefit from the services, with the aim of reducing the likelihood of the youth continuing in the criminal justice system.
A_model:
California has enacted a new law that allows certain transitional age youth (those aged 18-21) to participate in a deferred entry of judgment pilot program in certain counties. The program is designed to provide rehabilitative services to eligible defendants who have been charged with a felony offense, and who meet certain criteria, including being suitable for the program after an evaluation using a risk assessment tool, showing the ability to benefit from services generally reserved for delinquents, and meeting the rules of the juvenile hall. The probation department, in consultation with the county sheriff, shall develop an evaluation process using a risk assessment tool to determine eligibility for the program. If an eligible defendant consents to participate in the program, waives their right to a speedy trial or a speedy preliminary hearing, pleads guilty to the charge or charges, and waives time for the pronouncement of judgment, the court shall grant deferred entry of judgment. If the defendant is required to register as a sex offender or has certain prior convictions, they are not eligible for the program. If the probation department determines that the defendant is not eligible for the deferred entry of judgment pilot program or the defendant does not consent to participate in the program, the proceedings shall continue as in any other case. If it appears to the probation department that the defendant is performing unsatisfactorily in the program as a result of the commission of a new crime or the violation of any of the rules of the juvenile hall or that the defendant is not benefiting from the services in the program, the probation department may make a motion for entry of judgment.
A:
Existing law provides that entry of judgment may be deferred with respect to a defendant who is charged with certain crimes involving possession of controlled substances, who pleads guilty to the charge or charges, and who meets certain criteria, including that he or she has no prior convictions for any offense involving controlled substances and has had no felony convictions within the 5 years prior, as specified. Existing law requires the criminal charge or charges to be dismissed if the defendant has performed satisfactorily in a specified program during the period in which deferred entry of judgment was granted.
This bill would authorize specified counties to establish a pilot program to operate a deferred entry of judgment pilot program for eligible defendants. The bill would authorize a defendant to participate in the program within the county’s juvenile hall if that person is charged with committing a felony offense, except as specified, he or she pleads guilty to the charge or charges, and the probation department determines that the person meets specified requirements, including that the defendant is 18 years of age or older, but under 21 years of age on the date the offense was committed, is suitable for the program, and shows the ability to benefit from services generally reserved for delinquents. The bill would require the probation department to develop a plan for reentry services.
The bill would require the court to grant deferred entry of judgment if the eligible defendant consents to participate in the program, waives his or her right to a speedy trial or a speedy preliminary hearing, pleads guilty to the charge or charges, and waives time for the pronouncement of judgment. The bill would also require the court to render a finding of guilt to the charge or charges pleaded, enter judgment, and schedule a sentencing hearing, and would require the return of the defendant to custody in a county jail if the court finds that the defendant is performing unsatisfactorily in the program or that the defendant is not benefiting from the services in the program. If the defendant has performed satisfactorily during the period in which deferred entry of judgment was granted, at the end of that period, the bill would require the court to dismiss the criminal charge or charges.
The bill would require a county, prior to establishing a pilot program, to apply to the Board of State and Community Corrections for approval of a county institution as a suitable place for confinement for the purpose of the pilot program. The bill would require the board to review and approve or deny the application of the county within 30 days of receiving notice of this proposed use. The bill would also require each county to establish a multidisciplinary team consisting of representatives of specified local entities. The team would be required to meet periodically to review and discuss the implementation, practices, and impact of the program.
The bill would require the probation department to submit data relating to the effectiveness of the program to the Division of Recidivism Reduction and Re-Entry, within the Department of Justice. The bill would prohibit a defendant participating in the program from coming into contact with minors within the juvenile hall, would prohibit a defendant from serving longer than one year in custody within a county’s juvenile hall pursuant to the program, and would require the board to review a county’s pilot program to ensure compliance with the federal Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974, as specified.
The bill would require a county that establishes a pilot program pursuant to these provisions to submit data regarding the pilot program to the board, and would require the board to conduct an evaluation of the pilot program’s impact and effectiveness, as specified. The bill would require the evaluation to be combined into a comprehensive report and submitted to the Assembly and Senate Committees on Public Safety. The bill would also authorize the board to contract with an independent entity, including, but not limited to, the Regents of the University of California, to carry out these duties.
The authority conferred by this bill would be repealed on January 1, 2020.
This bill would make legislative findings and declarations as to the necessity of a special statute for the Counties of Alameda, Butte, Napa, Nevada, and Santa Clara.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 67386 of the Education Code is amended to read:
67386.
(a) In order to receive state funds for student financial assistance, the governing board of each community college district, the Trustees of the California State University, the Regents of the University of California, and the governing boards of independent postsecondary institutions shall adopt a policy concerning sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking, as defined in the federal Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. Sec. 1092(f)), involving a student, both on and off campus. The policy shall include all of the following:
(1) An affirmative consent standard in the determination of whether consent was given by both parties to sexual activity. “Affirmative consent” means affirmative, conscious, and voluntary agreement to engage in sexual activity. It is the responsibility of each person involved in the sexual activity to ensure that he or she has the affirmative consent of the other or others to engage in the sexual activity. Lack of protest or resistance does not mean consent, nor does silence mean consent. Affirmative consent must be ongoing throughout a sexual activity and can be revoked at any time. The existence of a dating relationship between the persons involved, or the fact of past sexual relations between them, should never by itself be assumed to be an indicator of consent.
(2) A policy that, in the evaluation of complaints in any disciplinary process, it shall not be a valid excuse to alleged lack of affirmative consent that the accused believed that the complainant consented to the sexual activity under either of the following circumstances:
(A) The accused’s belief in affirmative consent arose from the intoxication or recklessness of the accused.
(B) The accused did not take reasonable steps, in the circumstances known to the accused at the time, to ascertain whether the complainant affirmatively consented.
(3) A policy that the standard used in determining whether the elements of the complaint against the accused have been demonstrated is the preponderance of the evidence.
(4) A policy that, in the evaluation of complaints in the disciplinary process, it shall not be a valid excuse that the accused believed that the complainant affirmatively consented to the sexual activity if the accused knew or reasonably should have known that the complainant was unable to consent to the sexual activity under any of the following circumstances:
(A) The complainant was asleep or unconscious.
(B) The complainant was incapacitated due to the influence of drugs, alcohol, or medication, so that the complainant could not understand the fact, nature, or extent of the sexual activity.
(C) The complainant was unable to communicate due to a mental or physical condition.
(b) In order to receive state funds for student financial assistance, the governing board of each community college district, the Trustees of the California State University, the Regents of the University of California, and the governing boards of independent postsecondary institutions shall adopt detailed and victim-centered policies and protocols regarding sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking involving a student that comport with best practices and current professional standards. At a minimum, the policies and protocols shall cover all of the following:
(1) A policy statement on how the institution will provide appropriate protections for the privacy of individuals involved, including confidentiality.
(2) Initial response by the institution’s personnel to a report of an incident, including requirements specific to assisting the victim, providing information in writing about the importance of preserving evidence, and the identification and location of witnesses.
(3) Response to stranger and nonstranger sexual assault.
(4) The preliminary victim interview, including the development of a victim interview protocol, and a comprehensive followup victim interview, as appropriate.
(5) Contacting and interviewing the accused.
(6) Seeking the identification and location of witnesses.
(7) Providing written notification to the victim about the availability of, and contact information for, on- and off-campus resources and services, and coordination with law enforcement, as appropriate.
(8) Participation of victim advocates and other supporting people.
(9) Investigating allegations that alcohol or drugs were involved in the incident.
(10) Providing that an individual who participates as a complainant or witness in an investigation of sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, or stalking will not be subject to disciplinary sanctions for a violation of the institution’s student conduct policy at or near the time of the incident, unless the institution determines that the violation was egregious, including, but not limited to, an action that places the health or safety of any other person at risk or involves plagiarism, cheating, or academic dishonesty.
(11) The role of the institutional staff supervision.
(12) A comprehensive, trauma-informed training program for campus officials involved in investigating and adjudicating sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking cases.
(13) Procedures for confidential reporting by victims and third parties.
(c) In order to receive state funds for student financial assistance, the governing board of each community college district, the Trustees of the California State University, the Regents of the University of California, and the governing boards of independent postsecondary institutions shall, to the extent feasible, enter into memoranda of understanding, agreements, or collaborative partnerships with existing on-campus and community-based organizations, including rape crisis centers, to refer students for assistance or make services available to students, including counseling, health, mental health, victim advocacy, and legal assistance, and including resources for the accused.
(d) In order to receive state funds for student financial assistance, the governing board of each community college district, the Trustees of the California State University, the Regents of the University of California, and the governing boards of independent postsecondary institutions shall implement comprehensive prevention and outreach programs addressing sexual violence, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking. A comprehensive prevention program shall include a range of prevention strategies, including, but not limited to, empowerment programming for victim prevention, awareness raising campaigns, primary prevention, bystander intervention, and risk reduction. Outreach programs shall be provided to make students aware of the institution’s policy on sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking. At a minimum, an outreach program shall include a process for contacting and informing the student body, campus organizations, athletic programs, and student groups about the institution’s overall sexual assault policy, the practical implications of an affirmative consent standard, and the rights and responsibilities of students under the policy.
(e) (1) Commencing January 1, 2018, in order to receive state funds for student financial assistance, the governing board of each community college district, the Trustees of the California State University, the Regents of the University of California, and the governing boards of independent postsecondary institutions shall conduct annual training of their respective employees, in addition to the training required by paragraph (12) of subdivision (b), on the employee’s obligations in responding to and reporting incidents of sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking involving students.
(2) An employee trained pursuant to this subdivision shall be deemed to have satisfied the annual training requirement for each campus or community college district, as applicable, within each segment that the employee is employed at for that year.
(f) Outreach programming shall be included as part of every incoming student’s orientation.
A_model:
The article describes a new policy in the state of California that requires community college districts, the California State University, the University of California, and independent postsecondary institutions to adopt a policy concerning sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking involving a student. The policy must include an affirmative consent standard, a policy that evaluates complaints in any disciplinary process, and a policy that the standard used in determining whether the elements of the complaint against the accused have been demonstrated is the preponderance of the evidence. The policy must also provide detailed and victim-centered protocols regarding sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking involving a student that comport with best practices and current professional standards. The policy requires the institutions to provide appropriate protections for the privacy of individuals involved, including confidentiality, and to provide written notification to the victim about the availability of, and contact information for, on- and off-campus resources and services, and coordination with law enforcement, as appropriate. The policy also requires the institutions to conduct annual training of their respective employees on their obligations in responding to and reporting incidents of sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking involving students.
A:
Existing law requires the governing boards of each community college district, the Trustees of the California State University, the Regents of the University of California, and the governing boards of independent postsecondary institutions, in order to receive state funds for student financial assistance, to adopt detailed and victim-centered policies and protocols regarding sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking involving a student that comport with best practices and current professional standards, covering specified topics, including a comprehensive, trauma-informed training program for campus officials involved in investigating and adjudicating sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking cases.
This bill would, commencing January 1, 2018, require those institutions, in order to receive state funds for student financial assistance, to conduct annual training of their respective employees, in addition to the training described above, on the employee’s obligations in responding to and reporting incidents of sexual assault, domestic violence, dating violence, and stalking involving students. The bill would provide that an employee trained pursuant to these provisions is deemed to have satisfied the annual training requirement for each campus or community college district, as applicable, within each segment that the employee is employed at for that year.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 11658 of the Insurance Code is amended to read:
11658.
(a) A workers’ compensation insurance policy or endorsement shall not be issued by an insurer to any person in this state unless the insurer files a copy of the form or endorsement with the rating organization pursuant to subdivision (e) of Section 11750.3 and 30 days have expired from the date the form or endorsement is received by the commissioner from the rating organization without notice from the commissioner, unless the commissioner gives written approval of the form or endorsement prior to that time.
(b) (1) An ancillary agreement shall not be issued by an insurer to a California employer unless the insurer files a copy of the ancillary agreement with the rating organization pursuant to subdivision (e) of Section 11750.3 and 30 days have expired from the date the ancillary agreement is received by the commissioner from the rating organization without notice from the commissioner unless the commissioner gives written approval of the ancillary agreement prior to that time.
(2) (A) Subdivision (a) and paragraph (1) of this subdivision do not apply to an ancillary agreement between an insurer and a California employer issued in conjunction with a workers’ compensation policy or endorsement that contains a deductible obligation or retrospectively rated loss limitation equal to or greater than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000), provided that, for an endorsement containing a deductible obligation, the endorsement complies with the requirements of subdivision (e) of Section 11735, or, for a retrospectively rated policy, is contained in an endorsement filed by a rating organization pursuant to Sections 11750.3 and 11753 and approved by the commissioner, and the California employer meets at least three of the following criteria:
(i) Is represented by a broker for negotiations regarding the ancillary agreement and either has a full-time risk manager involved in the evaluation of an ancillary agreement or is represented by counsel during negotiations regarding an ancillary agreement.
(ii) Has 500 or more employees.
(iii) Has an annual nationwide payroll in excess of twenty million dollars ($20,000,000).
(iv) Has a workers’ compensation manual standard premium on a countrywide basis in excess of one million dollars ($1,000,000).
(B) Paragraph (1) controls, and this paragraph does not apply to, an ancillary agreement between an insurer and a California employer that is either of the following:
(i) Issued pursuant to a coemployment arrangement, as defined in subdivision (g).
(ii) Negotiated, managed, or administered, in whole or in part, by a managing general agent (MGA), as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 769.81.
(3) An ancillary agreement shall not do either of the following:
(A) Amend or revise the coverage provided, any cancellation provision, any dispute resolution agreement, any premium or other costs, or the benefits payable, under a workers’ compensation policy unless it is filed and approved in accordance with this section.
(B) Include charges or costs as allocated loss adjustment expenses that are not defined as allocated loss adjustment expenses in the California Workers’ Compensation Uniform Statistical Reporting Plan - 1995, as identified in Section 2318.6 of Title 10 of the California Code of Regulations and any subsequent revisions, unless the ancillary agreement is filed and approved in accordance with this section.
(4) The terms and conditions of a workers’ compensation policy and any endorsements shall take precedence over the provisions contained in an ancillary agreement if there is an inconsistency or a conflict between the policy or endorsement and the ancillary agreement.
(5) Contemporaneously with any written quote to provide workers’ compensation coverage to a California employer, the insurer shall provide to the insurance agent or broker for the employer a draft of any ancillary agreement that the insurer reasonably expects to require the employer to sign, together with a notice that the terms of the ancillary agreement are negotiable between the insurer and the employer.
(6) An insurer may use and shall subsequently notify the insurance commissioner of an ancillary agreement described in paragraph (2) by providing a copy of the ancillary agreement to the commissioner within 30 days of the insurer issuing the ancillary agreement. The ancillary agreement shall not be subject to filing with the commissioner or rating organization or approval by the commissioner, but it shall be subject to all other authority granted to the commissioner under law.
(7) An ancillary agreement that is described in paragraph (2) shall include language stating that the ancillary agreement has not been filed with the rating organization or filed with, or approved by, the commissioner.
(8) This subdivision applies to ancillary agreements issued or renewed on or after January 1, 2017.
(c) If the commissioner notifies the insurer that a policy form, endorsement, or ancillary agreement does not comply with the requirements of law, specifying the reasons for his or her opinion, it is unlawful for the insurer to issue any policy form, endorsement, or ancillary agreement in that form.
(d) The withdrawal of a policy form, endorsement, or ancillary agreement by the commissioner pursuant to this section shall not affect the status of the policyholder as having secured payment for compensation or affect the substitution of the insurer for the policyholder in workers’ compensation proceedings as set forth in the provisions of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 3700) of Part 1 of Division 4 of the Labor Code during the period of time in which the policy form, endorsement, or ancillary agreement was in effect.
(e) The terms and provisions of collateral and security agreements shall be negotiated contemporaneously with the inception or renewal of the underlying policy, and any revisions or additions to those terms subsequent to the inception or renewal of the policy shall be mutually agreed upon by the parties.
(f) This section does not apply to limited policies submitted for approval to the commissioner pursuant to Section 11657.
(g) For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
(1) (A) “Ancillary agreement” means an agreement that is a supplementary writing or contract relating to a policy or endorsement form that adds to, subtracts from, or is inconsistent with the obligations of either the insured or the insurer under an insurance policy or endorsement.
(B) “Ancillary agreement” does not include any of the following:
(i) Limiting and restricting endorsements.
(ii) Customized limiting and restricting endorsements.
(iii) Collateral and security agreements.
(2) “California employer” means an employer whose principal place of business is in California and whose California payroll constitutes the majority of the employer’s payroll for purposes of determining premium under the policy.
(3) “Coemployment arrangement” means any arrangement, under contract or otherwise, whereby an entity utilizes the services of a third party to provide workers or human resources services for a fee or other compensation, including, but not limited to:
(A) A professional employer organization.
(B) A leasing employer, as defined in Section 606.5 of the Unemployment Insurance Code.
(C) A temporary services employer, as defined in Section 606.5 of the Unemployment Insurance Code.
(D) Any employer, regardless of name or form of organization, that is in the business of providing workers to other employers.
(4) “Collateral and security agreement” means an agreement between a California employer and an insurer under a large deductible program, large risk-rating program, or retrospectively rated program that relates to payments and reimbursements that the insured is contractually obligated to make to the insurer and that includes one or more of the following terms or provisions:
(A) The timing, method, and conditions for making payments to the insurer for amounts imposed by any state or regulatory taxing authority that are made on the insured’s behalf.
(B) The timing, method, and conditions for funding, paying, or reimbursing deductible or retrospectively rated amounts or other policy-related charges due under a policy.
(C) The type and amount of collateral the insured is required to post as security for its obligations.
(D) Payment due dates and transmittal information.
(E) Terms or provisions related to claims administration, including the method for selecting a claims administrator.
(F) Termination and dispute resolution provisions applicable to the collateral and security agreement.
(G) Terms of default under the collateral and security agreement.
(5) “Customized limiting and restricting endorsement” means an endorsement unique to a specific policy used under the following circumstances or for the following purposes:
(A) When the employer’s business is conducted in such a manner that it is impossible or impracticable to determine the nature, scope, and extent of employment covered by the insurer.
(B) To prevent the performance of work in such an extremely hazardous manner or under such hazardous conditions as would reflect a reckless disregard by the employer for the welfare of its employees.
(C) To prevent the issuance of an unrestricted policy if it would encourage an operation that is contrary to law or to the rules of a regulatory agency.
(6) “Limiting and restricting endorsement” means an endorsement that excludes from coverage some portion of workers’ compensation liability for which the employer is required to secure payment pursuant to the Labor Code that, after approval of the endorsement by the Insurance Commissioner, may be endorsed to a workers’ compensation policy.
(h) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2022, and as of that date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 1, 2022, deletes or extends that date.
SEC. 2.
Section 11658 is added to the Insurance Code, to read:
11658.
(a) A workers’ compensation insurance policy or endorsement shall not be issued by an insurer to any person in this state unless the insurer files a copy of the form or endorsement with the rating organization pursuant to subdivision (e) of Section 11750.3 and 30 days have expired from the date the form or endorsement is received by the commissioner from the rating organization without notice from the commissioner, unless the commissioner gives written approval of the form or endorsement prior to that time.
(b) If the commissioner notifies the insurer that the filed form or endorsement does not comply with the requirements of law, specifying the reasons for his or her opinion, it is unlawful for the insurer to issue any policy or endorsement in that form.
(c) The withdrawal of a policy form or endorsement by the commissioner pursuant to this section shall not affect the status of the policyholder as having secured payment for compensation or affect the substitution of the insurer for the policyholder in workers’ compensation proceedings as set forth in the provisions of Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 3700) of Part 1 of Division 4 of the Labor Code during the period of time in which the policy form or endorsement was in effect.
(d) This section does not apply to limited policies submitted for approval to the commissioner pursuant to Section 11657.
(e) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2022.
SEC. 3.
Section 11658.5 of the Insurance Code is amended to read:
11658.5.
(a) (1) An insurer that intends to use a dispute resolution or arbitration agreement to resolve disputes arising in California out of a workers’ compensation insurance policy, endorsement, ancillary agreement, or collateral and security agreement, as defined in Section 11658, issued to a California employer shall disclose to the employer, contemporaneously with any written quote that offers to provide insurance coverage, that choice of law and choice of venue or forum may be a jurisdiction other than California and that these terms are negotiable between the insurer and the employer. The disclosure shall be signed by the employer as evidence of receipt if the employer accepts the offer of coverage from that insurer.
(2) After compliance with paragraph (1), a dispute resolution or arbitration agreement may be negotiated by the insurer and the employer before any dispute arises.
(b) Nothing in this section is intended to interfere with any authority granted to the Insurance Commissioner under current law.
(c) Failure by the insurer to observe the requirements of subdivision (a) shall result in a default to California as the choice of law and forum for resolution of disputes arising in California.
(d) For purposes of this section, a “California employer” means an employer whose principal place of business is in California and whose California payroll constitutes the majority of the employer’s payroll for purposes of determining premium under the policy.
(e) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2022, and as of that date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before January 1, 2022, deletes or extends that date.
SEC. 4.
Section 11658.5 is added to the Insurance Code, to read:
11658.5.
(a) (1) An insurer that intends to use a dispute resolution or arbitration agreement to resolve disputes arising in California out of a workers’ compensation insurance policy or endorsement issued to a California employer shall disclose to the employer, contemporaneously with any written quote that offers to provide insurance coverage, that choice of law and choice of venue or forum may be a jurisdiction other than California and that these terms are negotiable between the insurer and the employer. The disclosure shall be signed by the employer as evidence of receipt if the employer accepts the offer of coverage from that insurer.
(2) After compliance with paragraph (1), a dispute resolution or arbitration agreement may be negotiated by the insurer and the employer before any dispute arises.
(b) Nothing in this section is intended to interfere with any authority granted to the Insurance Commissioner under current law.
(c) Failure by the insurer to observe the requirements of subdivision (a) shall result in a default to California as the choice of law and forum for resolution of disputes arising in California.
(d) For purposes of this section, a “California employer” means an employer whose principal place of business is in California and whose California payroll constitutes the majority of the employer’s payroll for purposes of determining premium under the policy.
(e) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2022.
A_model:
The article discusses a new California law that requires insurers to file a copy of a workers' compensation insurance policy or endorsement with the state's rating organization before issuing it to any person in the state. The law also requires insurers to file a copy of any ancillary agreement with the rating organization, and the agreement cannot amend or revise the coverage provided by the policy unless it is filed and approved in accordance with the law. The law applies to any California employer and any ancillary agreement that contains a deductible obligation or retrospectively rated loss limitation equal to or greater than $250,000. The law also specifies the terms and conditions of a workers' compensation policy and any endorsements that take precedence over the provisions contained in an ancillary agreement if there is an inconsistency or conflict between the policy or endorsement and the ancillary agreement. The law applies to policies and endorsements issued or renewed on or after January 1, 2017.
A:
Existing law prohibits a workers’ compensation insurance policy or endorsement from being issued by an insurer unless the insurer files a copy of the form or endorsement with a rating organization and 30 days have expired from the date the form or endorsement is received by the Insurance Commissioner from the rating organization without notice from the commissioner, unless the commissioner gives written approval of the form or the endorsement prior to that time.
This bill would prohibit an ancillary agreement, as defined, to a workers’ compensation insurance policy from being issued by an insurer to a California employer, as defined, unless the insurer files a copy of the ancillary agreement with a rating organization and 30 days have expired from the date the ancillary agreement is received by the commissioner from the rating organization without notice from the commissioner unless the commissioner gives written approval of the ancillary agreement prior to that time. The prohibition would not apply to an ancillary agreement between an insurer and a California employer issued in conjunction with a workers’ compensation policy or endorsement that contains a deductible obligation or retrospectively rated loss limitation and meets specified criteria. The bill would authorize an insurer to use such an ancillary agreement and would require an insurer to submit a copy of that ancillary agreement to the commissioner within 30 days of issuing the ancillary agreement. The bill would provide that the terms and conditions of a workers’ compensation policy and any endorsements take precedence over the provisions contained in an ancillary agreement in the case of an inconsistency or conflict between the policy or endorsement and the ancillary agreement. The bill would make additional changes relating to collateral and security agreements, as defined. The changes made by the bill would apply to ancillary agreements issued or renewed on or after January 1, 2017. The bill would also make conforming changes.
The changes made by the bill would apply only until January 1, 2022.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 14134.5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is amended to read:
14134.5.
All of the following provisions apply to the provision of services pursuant to subdivision (u) of Section 14132:
(a) “Comprehensive perinatal provider” means any general practice physician, family practice physician, obstetrician-gynecologist, pediatrician, certified nurse midwife, a group, any of whose members is one of the above-named providers, or any preferred provider organization or clinic enrolled in the Medi-Cal program and certified pursuant to the standards of this section.
(b) “Perinatal” means the period from the establishment of pregnancy to one month following delivery.
(c) “Comprehensive perinatal services” shall include, but not be limited to, the provision of the combination of services developed through the former Department of Health Services Obstetrical Access Pilot Program provided or coordinated by a comprehensive perinatal provider.
(d) The comprehensive perinatal provider shall schedule visits with appropriate providers and shall track the patient to verify whether services have been received. As part of the reimbursement for coordinating these services, the comprehensive perinatal provider shall ensure the provision of the following services either through the provider’s own service or through subcontracts or referrals to other providers:
(1) A psychosocial assessment and when appropriate referrals to counseling.
(2) Nutrition assessments and when appropriate referral to counseling on food supplement programs, vitamins, and breastfeeding.
(3) Health, childbirth, and parenting education.
(e) (1) Except where existing law prohibits the employment of physicians, a health care provider may employ or contract with all of the following medical and other practitioners for the purpose of providing the comprehensive services delineated in this section:
(A) Physicians, including a general practitioner, a family practice physician, a pediatrician, or an obstetrician-gynecologist.
(B) Certified nurse midwives.
(C) Licensed midwives.
(D) Nurses.
(E) Nurse practitioners.
(F) Physician assistants.
(G) Social workers.
(H) Health and childbirth educators.
(I) Registered dietitians.
(2) The department shall adopt regulations that define the qualifications of any of these practitioners who are not currently included under the regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. Providers shall, as feasible, utilize staffing patterns that reflect the linguistic and cultural features of the populations they serve.
(f) The California Medical Assistance Program and the Maternal and Child Health Branch of the State Department of Public Health in consultation with the California Conference of Local Health Officers shall establish standards for health care providers and for services rendered pursuant to this subdivision.
(g) The department shall assist local health departments to establish a community perinatal program whose responsibilities may include certifying and monitoring providers of comprehensive perinatal services. The department shall provide the local health departments with technical assistance for the purpose of implementing the community perinatal program. The department shall, to the extent feasible, and to the extent funding for administrative costs is available, utilize local health departments in the administration of the perinatal program. If these funds are not available, the department shall use alternative means to implement the community perinatal program.
(h) (1) It is the intent of the Legislature that the department shall establish a method for reimbursement of comprehensive perinatal providers that shall include a fee for coordinating services and shall be sufficient to cover reasonable costs for the provision of comprehensive perinatal services. The department may utilize fees for service, capitated fees, or global fees to reimburse providers. However, if capitated or global fees are established, the department shall set minimum standards for the provision of services including, but not limited to, the number of prenatal visits and the amount and type of psychosocial, nutritional, and educational services patients shall receive.
(2) Notwithstanding the type of reimbursement system, the comprehensive perinatal provider shall not be financially at risk for the provision of inpatient services. The provision of inpatient services that are not related to perinatal care shall not be subject to the provisions of this section. Inpatient services related to services pursuant to this subdivision shall be reimbursed, in accordance with Section 14081, 14086, 14087, or 14087.2, whichever is applicable.
(i) The department shall develop systems for the monitoring and oversight of the comprehensive perinatal services provided in this section. The monitoring shall include, but shall not be limited to, the collection of information using the perinatal data form.
(j) Participation for services provided pursuant to this section shall be voluntary. The department shall adopt patient rights safeguards for recipients of the comprehensive perinatal services.
(k) The amendments made to this section by the act that added this subdivision shall not be construed to revise or expand the scope of practice of licensed midwives, as defined in Article 24 (commencing with Section 2505) of Chapter 5 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code.
(l) Notwithstanding subdivision (a), on the effective date of the regulations adopted by the Medical Board of California pursuant to Section 2507 of the Business and Professions Code, a licensed midwife shall be eligible to serve as a comprehensive perinatal provider.
SEC. 2.
The State Department of Health Care Services shall commence, no later than March 1, 2016, the revision of existing regulations as it determines are necessary for the implementation of the amendments made to Section 14134.5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code by this act, in accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act (Chapter 3.5 (commencing with Section 11340) of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code).
A_model:
The article describes changes to Section 14134.5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code in California. It specifies requirements for comprehensive perinatal services, which include psychosocial assessments, nutrition assessments, health, childbirth, and parenting education. The article also outlines the qualifications of medical and other practitioners who can provide these services, and establishes standards for health care providers and services rendered. The article further provides for reimbursement of comprehensive perinatal providers, monitoring and oversight of services, and patient rights safeguards. The amendments made by the article are to be implemented by the State Department of Health Care Services, which is required to revise existing regulations as necessary.
A:
Existing law provides for the Medi-Cal program, which is administered by the State Department of Health Care Services, under which qualified low-income individuals receive health care services, including comprehensive perinatal services. The Medi-Cal program is, in part, governed and funded by federal Medicaid program provisions. Existing law, to the extent that federal financial participation is available, requires that midwifery services provided by a licensed midwife be covered under the Medi-Cal program.
Existing law, the Licensed Midwifery Practice Act of 1993, provides for the licensure of midwives by the Medical Board of California. Existing law authorizes a licensed midwife to assist a woman only in normal pregnancy and childbirth, which is defined as meeting specified conditions, including, among others, a pregnancy in which there is an absence of any preexisting maternal disease or condition likely to affect the pregnancy and of significant disease arising from the pregnancy. Existing law requires the board to adopt regulations further specifying those conditions.
Existing law establishes the Comprehensive Perinatal Services Program, administered by the State Department of Public Health, to maintain, to the extent resources are available, a permanent statewide community-based comprehensive perinatal system to provide care and services to low-income pregnant women and their infants who are considered underserved in terms of comprehensive perinatal care. Existing law generally authorizes a health care provider to employ or contract specified practitioners, including physicians and certified nurse midwives, for the purpose of providing comprehensive perinatal services.
This bill would additionally authorize a health care provider to employ or contract licensed midwives for the purpose of providing comprehensive perinatal services. The bill would provide that, on the effective date of the regulations adopted by the board pursuant to the provisions described above, a licensed midwife shall be eligible to serve as a “comprehensive perinatal provider,” as defined. The bill would declare that its provisions shall not be construed to revise or expand the scope of practice, as defined, of licensed midwives. The bill would require the State Department of Health Care Services to commence, no later than March 1, 2016, the revision of existing regulations as it determines are necessary for the implementation of this bill.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
The Legislature finds and declares the following:
(a) It is a matter of statewide concern that responsible competitive bidding at the University of California become more transparent than it is at present, in order that illegal and abusive employment practices by contractors can be prevented and, if not prevented, then brought to light and eliminated, with all victims of wage theft made whole for their employers’ violations.
(b) It is a matter of statewide concern that responsible competitive bidding at the University of California not undercut the wages and benefits provided by the University of California for comparable work, given that a significant percentage of University of California employees already are eligible for public benefits and any material decrease in the compensation of employees performing such work would result in materially increased General Fund costs for the provision of benefits.
(c) It is a matter of statewide concern that the University of California not repeat past instances in which public resources have been squandered via contracting out to for-profit private contractors that charge significant administrative overhead.
(d) In amending the Public Contract Code to promote responsible contracting at the University of California, it is important to delay the amendments’ effective date until January 1, 2018, in order to afford adequate preparatory time to the university and to contractors intending to bid on university contracts, as well as to lessen the cost of the amendments’ requirements by delaying their effect until after the university’s $15 per hour minimum wage for contracted employees is fully in effect.
SEC. 2.
Section 10507.6 is added to the Public Contract Code, to read:
10507.6.
(a) For the purposes of this article, to qualify as a lowest responsible bidder or best value awardee on any contract for building maintenance, cleaning or custodial services, call center services, dining and food services, gardening, grounds keeping and plant nursery services, laborer services, mail room services, parking, shuttle bus, or transportation services, security services, storekeeper services, truck driving services, patient care technical employee services, patient billing services, medical transcribing services, patient escort services, or nursing assistant services a bidder shall satisfy the requirements set forth in this section.
(b) (1) A bidder shall certify in writing to the University of California that the bid includes a total employee compensation package, including fringe benefits, that is valued on a per-employee basis at a level sufficient that it does not undercut by more than 5 percent the average per-employee value of total compensation, including fringe benefits, for employees of the University of California who perform comparable work at the relevant campus, medical center, or laboratory at which the bidder proposes to perform the work.
(2) The University of California shall implement this section by including in its request for proposals a calculation of the average per-employee value of total compensation, including fringe benefits, for employees of the University of California who perform comparable work at the relevant campus, medical center, or laboratory, and that calculation shall use all known cost escalators to project the future rate of growth of average per-employee total compensation costs.
(c) A bidder shall certify in writing to the University of California that, within the prior five years, the bidder has not been found liable for any violation of Section 484 of the Penal Code, Sections 200 through 558, inclusive, 1197.5, or 2810.5 of the Labor Code, or any wage order issued by the Industrial Welfare Commission, in any amount totaling more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) or 0.3 percent of the bidder’s most recent annual gross revenue, whichever is less.
(d) All records provided by a bidder or contractor to the university pursuant to this section shall be disclosed to any member of the public making a request to the university under Section 6253 of the Government Code, provided that (1) the university shall redact those portions of such records containing confidential information within the meaning of subdivision (c) of Section 6254 of the Government Code, and (2) the university, in responding to any request made during the course of a bid process that is not yet complete, shall delay until after the bid process is complete before disclosing any records containing materials submitted by a bidder.
(e) The requirements of this section shall not apply to employees covered by Section 1191.5 of the Labor Code or subdivision (c) of Section 214 of Title 29 of the United States Code. Any employees covered by Section 1191.5 of the Labor Code or subdivision (c) of Section 214 of Title 29 of the United States Code shall be omitted from any and all certifications and disclosures required by this article.
(f) This section does not apply to any work subject to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code.
(g) This section shall become operative January 1, 2018.
SEC. 3.
Section 10507.7 of the Public Contract Code is amended to read:
10507.7.
(a) Except as provided for in this article, the Regents of the University of California shall let all contracts involving an expenditure of more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) annually for goods and materials to be sold to the University of California to the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications, or else reject all bids. Contracts for services to be performed, other than personal or professional services, involving an expenditure of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more annually shall be made or entered into with the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications, or else all bids shall be rejected. If the regents deem it to be for the best interest of the university, the regents may, on the refusal or failure of the successful bidder for materials, goods, or services to execute a tendered contract, award it to the second lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications. If the second lowest responsible bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the regents may likewise award it to the third lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications.
(b) This section shall remain in effect only until January 1, 2018, and as of that date is repealed, unless a later enacted statute, that is enacted before, deletes or extends that date.
SEC. 4.
Section 10507.7 is added to the Public Contract Code, to read:
10507.7.
(a) Except as provided for in this article, the Regents of the University of California shall let all contracts involving an expenditure of more than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) annually for goods and materials to be sold to the University of California to the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications, or else reject all bids. Contracts for services to be performed, other than personal or professional services, involving an expenditure of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more annually shall be made or entered into with the lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications, or else all bids shall be rejected. If the regents deem it to be for the best interest of the university, the regents may, on the refusal or failure of the successful bidder for materials, goods, or services to execute a tendered contract, award it to the second lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications. If the second lowest responsible bidder fails or refuses to execute the contract, the regents may likewise award it to the third lowest responsible bidder meeting specifications.
(b) For the purposes of this section, contracts for services involving an expenditure of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more annually shall include any renewal or extension of an existing contract if the renewal or extension involves an expenditure of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more annually.
(c) This section shall become operative on January 1, 2018.
A_model:
The state of California is taking steps to ensure that contractors bidding on projects at the University of California are not engaging in illegal or abusive employment practices. The legislature has found that it is a matter of statewide concern to promote responsible competitive bidding at the University of California and to prevent any undercutting of wages and benefits provided by the university. The legislature has also found that it is important to delay the implementation of changes to the Public Contract Code to allow adequate preparation time for the university and contractors. Section 10507.6 has been added to the Public Contract Code to require that bidders on contracts for certain services certify that their total employee compensation package, including fringe benefits, does not undercut the average per-employee value of total compensation for employees of the University of California. Additionally, bidders must certify that they have not been found liable for any violations of certain labor codes or wage orders in the past five years.
A:
Existing provisions of the California Constitution provide that the University of California constitutes a public trust and require the university to be administered by the Regents of the University of California (regents), a corporation in the form of a board, with full powers of organization and government, subject to legislative control only for specified purposes, including any competitive bidding procedures as may be applicable to the university by statute for the letting of construction contracts, sales of real property, and purchasing of materials, goods, and services. Existing law requires the regents, except as provided, to let all contracts involving an expenditure of $100,000 or more annually for goods and materials or services, excepting personal or professional services, to the lowest responsible bidder meeting certain specifications, or to reject all bids. Existing law, until January 1, 2018, also authorizes the bid evaluation and selection for these contracts to be determined by the best value, as defined.
This bill, beginning January 1, 2018, would require a bidder, to qualify as a lowest responsible bidder or best value awardee on contracts for specified services, among other requirements, to certify in writing to the University of California (UC) that the bid includes a total employee compensation package that is valued on a per-employee basis at a level sufficient that it does not materially undercut the average per-employee value of total compensation for UC employees who perform comparable work at the relevant campus, medical center, or laboratory at which the bidder proposes to perform the work. The bill would require the UC to include in its request for proposals a calculation of the average per-employee value of total compensation for UC employees who perform comparable work at the relevant location, as prescribed. The bill would, for these purposes, require contracts for services involving an expenditure of $100,000 or more annually to include any renewals or extensions of the contract that would result in an expenditure of $100,000 or more annually.
This bill would exclude specified employees and public works from these provisions.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 89724 of the Education Code is amended to read:
89724.
(a) All money received in accordance with the following shall be appropriated for the support of the California State University in addition to other amounts as may be appropriated by the Legislature:
(1) All money received from the sale of California State University publications.
(2) All money received under an agreement entered into pursuant to Section 89036.
(3) Except as to the fees and charges specified in subdivisions (g) and (h) of Section 89721, all money collected as fees from students of the California State University and received from other persons under Sections 89030, 89036 to 89039, inclusive, 89700, 89705, 89708, 89709, 89720, and 89721, and money received pursuant to Section 2080.8 of the Civil Code.
(b) Money received under Sections 89720 and 89721, or received pursuant to Section 2080.8 of the Civil Code, is appropriated pursuant to subdivision (a) without regard to fiscal year. Money received pursuant to Section 2080.8 of the Civil Code shall be used for student scholarships and loans pursuant to any regulations the trustees shall
provide, and while held pending the grant of a scholarship or loan, may be invested by the Treasurer upon approval of the trustees, in those eligible securities listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code. All interest or other earnings received pursuant to that investment shall also be used for those scholarships and loans.
provide.
Money received pursuant to Sections 89720 and 89721 may be invested, upon approval of the trustees, by the Treasurer or by the chief fiscal officer of a campus of the California State University, in those eligible securities listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code. Money received
under Sections 89720 and 89721, and received
pursuant to Section 2080.8 of the Civil Code, may
also
be invested, upon approval of the trustees and in accordance with Section 89726, by the chief fiscal officer of a campus of the California State University, in mutual funds subject to registration by, and under the regulatory authority of, the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, or in real estate investment trusts. All interest and other earnings received pursuant to the investment of money received pursuant to Sections 89720 and 89721 shall also be used for such purposes as may be established by the trustees consistent with the terms and conditions of the gift, bequest, devise, donation, or agreement under Sections 89720 and 89721. Except as otherwise provided with respect to money received pursuant to Section 2080.8 of the Civil Code and Sections 89720 and 89721, all money received pursuant to this section shall augment the support appropriation to the California State University for the fiscal year to which the collections apply.
(c) All money received from the sale or the disposition of real property acquired by or on behalf of a campus of the California State University by gift, devise, or donation pursuant to Section 89720 or pursuant to the predecessor of that section is hereby appropriated to the trustees for expenditure for capital outlay for the acquisition and improvement of real property for the campus, in addition to any other amounts appropriated by the Legislature. All money received from the sale or other disposition of personal property, other than money, acquired by or on behalf of a campus of the California State University by gift, bequest, or donation pursuant to Section 89720 or the predecessor of that section is hereby appropriated to the trustees for expenditure for capital outlay for, or the acquisition and improvement of real or personal property for, the campus, in addition to other amounts appropriated by the Legislature. No money shall be expended by the trustees under this subdivision without the approval of the Director of Finance. The money shall augment the support or capital outlay appropriation of the California State University current at the date of issuance of the Controller’s receipt as may be designated by the trustees prior to
their deposit
the deposit of that money
in the State Treasury.
SEC. 2.
Section 89725 of the Education Code is amended to read:
89725.
(a) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, grants, revenues, and funds of any nature received by the trustees for research, workshops, conferences, institutes, and special projects from the state, federal government, local government, or private persons, may be transmitted to the Treasurer and, if transmitted, shall be deposited in the California State University Special Projects Fund, which is hereby established in the State Treasury.
(b) All grants, revenues, and funds deposited in the California State University Special Projects Fund are appropriated without regard to fiscal year to the trustees for the operation, support, and development of research, workshops, conferences, institutes, and special projects in the California State University.
(c) Provision shall be made by the trustees for reimbursements to the General Fund for the cost of space and services furnished to projects funded by the California State University Special Projects Fund.
(d) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, the trustees shall have authority to establish the rules and procedures under which the fund shall operate. All expenditures shall be made in accordance with the rules and procedures, without prior approval of the Department of General Services or the Department of Finance. Expenditures from the fund shall be audited as frequently as the Audits Division of the Department of Finance deems appropriate.
(e)
(1)Except as provided in paragraph (2), moneys
Moneys
in the California State University Special Projects Fund may be invested by the Treasurer or by the chief fiscal officer of a campus of the California State University, upon approval of the trustees,
only
in eligible securities listed in Section 16430 of the Government
Code.
(2)Money received pursuant to Section 2080.8 of the Civil Code, may be invested, upon approval of the trustees and
Code, or,
in accordance with Section 89726,
by the Treasurer or by the chief fiscal officer of a campus of the California State University,
in mutual funds subject to registration by, and under the regulatory authority of, the United States Securities and Exchange
Commission,
Commission
or in real estate investment trusts. All interest or other earnings received pursuant to those investments shall be collected by the Treasurer and shall be deposited in the fund.
SEC. 3.
Section 89726 is added to the Education Code, to read:
89726.
(a) (1) The trustees may invest in securities or investments not listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code only if the trustees have established a committee to provide advice and expertise on investments.
(2) A majority of the members of the committee shall be individuals who have investment expertise and who are not
trustees.
employees of the California State University.
(3) The trustees shall allow the Treasurer to serve as a member of the committee or to appoint a deputy treasurer to serve as a member of the committee.
(b) The total amount invested in securities or investments not listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code shall not exceed the following amounts:
(1) In the fiscal year ending June 30, 2017, two hundred million dollars ($200,000,000).
(2) In the fiscal year ending June 30, 2018, four hundred million dollars ($400,000,000).
(3) In the fiscal year ending June 30, 2019, six hundred million dollars ($600,000,000).
(4) In the fiscal year ending June 30, 2020, and each fiscal year thereafter, thirty percent of all moneys invested pursuant to Sections 89724 and 89725.
(c) (1) The trustees shall receive an investment performance report quarterly and distribute an annual report to the Legislature, in compliance with Section 9795 of the Government Code, and the Department of Finance.
(2) The investment performance reports shall include investment returns, comparisons to benchmarks, holdings, market values, and fees.
(d) Any additional moneys earned through investments in securities or investments not listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code shall be used only for capital outlay or maintenance.
(e) The trustees shall not submit a request to the Department of Finance or the Legislature for any funds to compensate for investment loss resulting from investments in securities or investments not listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code.
(f) The trustees shall not cite investment loss resulting from investments in securities or investments not listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code to justify approval of an increase in student tuition or fees.
A_model:
The California State University receives funding from various sources, including money from the sale of publications, fees from students and other persons, and investments. The money received is used to support the university and its various programs, including research, workshops, conferences, institutes, and special projects. The trustees have the authority to establish rules and procedures for the use of the funds and can invest the money in eligible securities or mutual funds. The trustees must also establish a committee to provide advice and expertise on investments, and the total amount invested in securities or investments not listed in Section 16430 of the Government Code shall not exceed certain amounts. The additional money earned through investments can only be used for capital outlay or maintenance, and the trustees cannot use investment loss to justify an increase in student tuition or fees.
A:
Existing law authorizes the Treasurer or chief fiscal officer of a campus of the California State University to invest certain money received by the California State University in eligible securities and in investment certificates or withdrawal shares in federal or state credit unions doing business in this state as long as any money invested in this manner is fully insured by the National Credit Union Administration.
This bill would authorize the Treasurer or chief fiscal officer of a campus of the California State University to invest
certain of those moneys
that money
in mutual funds subject to registration by, and under the regulatory authority of, the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, or in real estate investment trusts. The bill would impose specified requirements on the Trustees of the California State University relating to those types of investments.
Existing law establishes the California State University Special Projects Fund, which consists of grants, revenues, and funds for the operation, support, and development of research, workshops, conferences, institutes, and special projects in the California State University. Existing law authorizes the Treasurer to invest money from the fund in eligible securities.
This bill would authorize the Treasurer or chief fiscal officer of a campus of the California State University to invest the money in the California State University Special Projects Fund in mutual funds subject to registration by, and under the regulatory authority of, the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, or in real estate investment trusts.
This bill would limit the total amount invested in these mutual funds and real estate investment trusts to specified amounts for each fiscal year, until, commencing with the 2019–20 fiscal year, up to 30% of that money could be invested in these asset categories.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 18930 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is amended to read:
18930.
(a) The State Department of Social Services shall establish a Food Assistance Program to provide assistance for those persons described in subdivision (b). The department shall enter into an agreement with the United States Department of Agriculture to use the existing federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program coupons, to the extent allowed by federal law, for the purposes of administering this program. Persons who are members of a household receiving CalFresh benefits under this chapter or under Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 18900), and are receiving CalWORKs benefits under Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 11200) of Part 3 on September 1, 1998, shall have eligibility determined under this chapter without need for a new application no later than November 1, 1998, and the beginning date of assistance under this chapter for those persons shall be September 1, 1998.
(b) (1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) and Section 18930.5, a noncitizen of the United States is eligible for the program established pursuant to subdivision (a) if the person’s immigration status meets the eligibility criteria of the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program in effect on August 21, 1996, but he or she is not eligible for federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits solely due to his or her immigration status under Public Law 104-193 and any subsequent amendments thereto.
(2) A noncitizen of the United States is eligible for the program established pursuant to subdivision (a) if the person is a battered immigrant spouse or child or the parent or child of the battered immigrant, as described in Section 1641(c) of Title 8 of the United States Code, as amended by Section 5571 of Public Law 105-33, if the person is a Cuban or Haitian entrant as described in Section 501(e) of the federal Refugee Education Assistance Act of 1980 (Public Law 96-422), or if the person is otherwise lawfully present in the United States.
(3) An applicant who is otherwise eligible for the program but who entered the United States on or after August 22, 1996, shall be eligible for aid under this chapter only if he or she is sponsored and one of the following apply:
(A) The sponsor has died.
(B) The sponsor is disabled as defined in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 11320.3.
(C) The applicant, after entry into the United States, is a victim of abuse by the sponsor or the spouse of the sponsor if the spouse is living with the sponsor.
(4) An applicant who is otherwise eligible for the program but who entered the United States on or after August 22, 1996, who does not meet one of the conditions of paragraph (3), is eligible for aid under this chapter beginning on October 1, 1999.
(5) The applicant shall be required to provide verification that one of the conditions of subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of paragraph (3) has been met.
(6) For purposes of subparagraph (C) of paragraph (3), abuse shall be defined in the same manner as provided in Section 11495.1 and Section 11495.12. A sworn statement of abuse by a victim, or the representative of the victim if the victim is not able to competently swear, shall be sufficient to establish abuse if one or more additional items of evidence of abuse is also provided. Additional evidence may include, but is not limited to, the following:
(A) Police, government agency, or court records or files.
(B) Documentation from a domestic violence program, legal, clinical, medical, or other professional from whom the applicant or recipient has sought assistance in dealing with abuse.
(C) A statement from any other individual with knowledge of the circumstances that provided the basis for the claim.
(D) Physical evidence of abuse.
(7) If the victim cannot provide additional evidence of abuse, then the sworn statement shall be sufficient if the county makes a determination documented in writing in the case file that the applicant is credible.
(c) In counties approved for alternate benefit issuance systems, that same alternate benefit issuance system shall be approved for the program established by this chapter.
(d) (1) To the extent allowed by federal law, the income, resources, and deductible expenses of those persons described in subdivision (b) shall be excluded when calculating CalFresh benefits under Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 18900).
(2) A household shall not receive more CalFresh benefits under this section than it would if no household member was rendered ineligible pursuant to Title IV of Public Law 104-193 and any subsequent amendments thereto.
SEC. 2.
If the Commission on State Mandates determines that this act contains costs mandated by the state, reimbursement to local agencies and school districts for those costs shall be made pursuant to Part 7 (commencing with Section 17500) of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code.
A_model:
The State of California has established a Food Assistance Program to provide assistance to certain individuals who are eligible for the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). The program is administered by the Department of Social Services and uses SNAP coupons to provide assistance. Noncitizens of the United States are eligible for the program if their immigration status meets the eligibility criteria for SNAP as of August 21, 1996, but they are not eligible for federal SNAP benefits solely due to their immigration status. The program has certain requirements for eligibility and verification of abuse by a sponsor. The program also excludes the income, resources, and deductible expenses of certain individuals when calculating CalFresh benefits. If the Commission on State Mandates determines that the act contains costs mandated by the state, reimbursement to local agencies and school districts for those costs will be made pursuant to Part 7 (commencing with Section 17500) of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code.
A:
Existing law requires the State Department of Social Services to establish the Food Assistance Program for certain immigrants residing in this state, including, among others, a battered immigrant spouse or a Cuban or Haitian entrant, as described in specified provisions of federal law.
This bill would provide that a noncitizen is eligible for aid under the Food Assistance Program if he or she is lawfully present in the United States. To the extent this bill would expand eligibility for the Food Assistance Program, which is administered by the counties, this bill would impose a state-mandated local program.
The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.
This bill would provide that, if the Commission on State Mandates determines that the bill contains costs mandated by the state, reimbursement for those costs shall be made pursuant to these statutory provisions.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 399.13 of the Public Utilities Code is amended to read:
399.13.
(a) (1) The commission shall direct each electrical corporation to annually prepare a renewable energy procurement plan that includes the matter in paragraph (5), to satisfy its obligations under the renewables portfolio standard. To the extent feasible, this procurement plan shall be proposed, reviewed, and adopted by the commission as part of, and pursuant to,
a
the
general procurement plan
process.
process (Sections 454.5 to 454.55, inclusive).
The commission shall require each electrical corporation to review and update its renewable energy procurement plan as it determines to be necessary. The commission shall require all other retail sellers to prepare and submit renewable energy procurement plans that address the requirements identified in paragraph (5).
(2) Every electrical corporation that owns electrical transmission facilities shall annually prepare, as part of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission Order 890 process, and submit to the commission, a report identifying any electrical transmission facility, upgrade, or enhancement that is reasonably necessary to achieve the renewables portfolio standard procurement requirements of this article. Each report shall look forward at least five years and, to ensure that adequate investments are made in a timely manner, shall include a preliminary schedule when an application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity will be made, pursuant to Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 1001), for any electrical transmission facility identified as being reasonably necessary to achieve the renewable energy resources procurement requirements of this article. Each electrical corporation that owns electrical transmission facilities shall ensure that project-specific interconnection studies are completed in a timely manner.
(3) The commission shall direct each retail seller to prepare and submit an annual compliance report that includes all of the following:
(A) The current status and progress made during the prior year toward procurement of eligible renewable energy resources as a percentage of retail sales, including, if applicable, the status of any necessary siting and permitting approvals from federal, state, and local agencies for those eligible renewable energy resources procured by the retail seller, and the current status of compliance with the portfolio content requirements of subdivision (c) of Section 399.16, including procurement of eligible renewable energy resources located outside the state and within the WECC and unbundled renewable energy credits.
(B) If the retail seller is an electrical corporation, the current status and progress made during the prior year toward construction of, and upgrades to, transmission and distribution facilities and other electrical system components it owns to interconnect eligible renewable energy resources and to supply the electricity generated by those resources to load, including the status of planning, siting, and permitting transmission facilities by federal, state, and local agencies.
(C) Recommendations to remove impediments to making progress toward achieving the renewable energy resources procurement requirements established pursuant to this article.
(4) The commission shall adopt, by rulemaking, all of the following:
(A) A process that provides criteria for the rank ordering and selection of least-cost and best-fit eligible renewable energy resources to comply with the California Renewables Portfolio Standard Program obligations on a total cost and best-fit basis. This process shall take into account all of the following:
(i) Estimates of indirect costs associated with needed transmission investments.
(ii) The cost impact of procuring the eligible renewable energy resources on the electrical corporation’s electricity portfolio.
(iii) The viability of the project to construct and reliably operate the eligible renewable energy resource, including the developer’s experience, the feasibility of the technology used to generate electricity, and the risk that the facility will not be built, or that construction will be delayed, with the result that electricity will not be supplied as required by the contract.
(iv) Workforce recruitment, training, and retention efforts, including the employment growth associated with the construction and operation of eligible renewable energy resources and goals for recruitment and training of women, minorities, and disabled veterans.
(v) (I) Estimates of electrical corporation expenses resulting from integrating and operating eligible renewable energy resources, including, but not limited to, any additional wholesale energy and capacity costs associated with integrating each eligible renewable resource.
(II) No later than December 31, 2015, the commission shall approve a methodology for determining the integration costs described in subclause (I).
(vi) Consideration of any statewide greenhouse gas emissions limit established pursuant to the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (Division 25.5 (commencing with Section 38500) of the Health and Safety Code).
(vii) Consideration of capacity and system reliability of the eligible renewable energy resource to ensure grid reliability.
(B) Rules permitting retail sellers to accumulate, beginning January 1, 2011, excess procurement in one compliance period to be applied to any subsequent compliance period. The rules shall apply equally to all retail sellers. In determining the quantity of excess procurement for the applicable compliance period, the commission shall retain the rules adopted by the commission and in effect as of January 1, 2015, for the compliance period specified in subparagraphs (A) to (C), inclusive, of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 399.15. For any subsequent compliance period, the rules shall allow the following:
(i) For electricity products meeting the portfolio content requirements of paragraph (1) of subdivision (b) of Section 399.16, contracts of any duration may count as excess procurement.
(ii) Electricity products meeting the portfolio content requirements of paragraph (2) or (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 399.16 shall not be counted as excess procurement. Contracts of any duration for electricity products meeting the portfolio content requirements of paragraph (2) or (3) of subdivision (b) of Section 399.16 that are credited towards a compliance period shall not be deducted from a retail seller’s procurement for purposes of calculating excess procurement.
(iii) If a retail seller notifies the commission that it will comply with the provisions of subdivision (b) for the compliance period beginning January 1, 2017, the provisions of clauses (i) and (ii) shall take effect for that retail seller for that compliance period.
(C) Standard terms and conditions to be used by all electrical corporations in contracting for eligible renewable energy resources, including performance requirements for renewable generators. A contract for the purchase of electricity generated by an eligible renewable energy resource, at a minimum, shall include the renewable energy credits associated with all electricity generation specified under the contract. The standard terms and conditions shall include the requirement that, no later than six months after the commission’s approval of an electricity purchase agreement entered into pursuant to this article, the following information about the agreement shall be disclosed by the commission: party names, resource type, project location, and project capacity.
(D) An appropriate minimum margin of procurement above the minimum procurement level necessary to comply with the renewables portfolio standard to mitigate the risk that renewable projects planned or under contract are delayed or canceled. This paragraph does not preclude an electrical corporation from voluntarily proposing a margin of procurement above the appropriate minimum margin established by the commission.
(5) Consistent with the goal of increasing California’s reliance on eligible renewable energy resources, the renewable energy procurement plan shall include all of the following:
(A) An assessment of annual or multiyear portfolio supplies and demand to determine the optimal mix of eligible renewable energy resources with deliverability characteristics that may include peaking, dispatchable, baseload, firm, and as-available capacity.
(B) Potential compliance delays related to the conditions described in paragraph (5) of subdivision (b) of Section 399.15.
(C) A bid solicitation setting forth the need for eligible renewable energy resources of each deliverability characteristic, required online dates, and locational preferences, if any.
(D) A status update on the development schedule of all eligible renewable energy resources currently under contract.
(E) Consideration of mechanisms for price adjustments associated with the costs of key components for eligible renewable energy resource projects with online dates more than 24 months after the date of contract execution.
(F) An assessment of the risk that an eligible renewable energy resource will not be built, or that construction will be delayed, with the result that electricity will not be delivered as required by the contract.
(6) In soliciting and procuring eligible renewable energy resources, each electrical corporation shall offer contracts of no less than 10 years duration, unless the commission approves of a contract of shorter duration.
(7) In soliciting and procuring eligible renewable energy resources for California-based projects, each electrical corporation shall give preference to renewable energy projects that provide environmental and economic benefits to communities afflicted with poverty or high unemployment, or that suffer from high emission levels of toxic air contaminants, criteria air pollutants, and greenhouse gases.
(8) In soliciting and procuring eligible renewable energy resources, each retail seller shall consider the best-fit attributes of resource types that ensure a balanced resource mix to maintain the reliability of the electrical grid.
(b) A retail seller may enter into a combination of long- and short-term contracts for electricity and associated renewable energy credits. Beginning January 1, 2021, at least 65 percent of the procurement a retail seller counts toward the renewables portfolio standard requirement of each compliance period shall be from its contracts of 10 years or more in duration or in its ownership or ownership agreements for eligible renewable energy resources.
(c) The commission shall review and accept, modify, or reject each electrical corporation’s renewable energy resource procurement plan prior to the commencement of renewable energy procurement pursuant to this article by an electrical corporation. The commission shall assess adherence to the approved renewable energy resource procurement plans in determining compliance with the obligations of this article.
(d) Unless previously preapproved by the commission, an electrical corporation shall submit a contract for the generation of an eligible renewable energy resource to the commission for review and approval consistent with an approved renewable energy resource procurement plan. If the commission determines that the bid prices are elevated due to a lack of effective competition among the bidders, the commission shall direct the electrical corporation to renegotiate the contracts or conduct a new solicitation.
(e) If an electrical corporation fails to comply with a commission order adopting a renewable energy resource procurement plan, the commission shall exercise its authority to require compliance.
(f) (1) The commission may authorize a procurement entity to enter into contracts on behalf of customers of a retail seller for electricity products from eligible renewable energy resources to satisfy the retail seller’s renewables portfolio standard procurement requirements. The commission shall not require any person or corporation to act as a procurement entity or require any party to purchase eligible renewable energy resources from a procurement entity.
(2) Subject to review and approval by the commission, the procurement entity shall be permitted to recover reasonable administrative and procurement costs through the retail rates of end-use customers that are served by the procurement entity and are directly benefiting from the procurement of eligible renewable energy resources.
(g) Procurement and administrative costs associated with contracts entered into by an electrical corporation for eligible renewable energy resources pursuant to this article and approved by the commission are reasonable and prudent and shall be recoverable in rates.
(h) Construction, alteration, demolition, installation, and repair work on an eligible renewable energy resource that receives production incentives pursuant to Section 25742 of the Public Resources Code, including work performed to qualify, receive, or maintain production incentives, are “public works” for the purposes of Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1720) of Part 7 of Division 2 of the Labor Code.
A_model:
The California Public Utilities Code has been amended to require electrical corporations to prepare an annual renewable energy procurement plan that includes specific matters, and to submit reports on the status of electrical transmission facilities. Retail sellers must also prepare and submit renewable energy procurement plans, and comply with other requirements. The commission is directed to adopt rules for the rank ordering and selection of eligible renewable energy resources, and for accumulating excess procurement. Standard terms and conditions for contracting for eligible renewable energy resources must be established, and an appropriate minimum margin of procurement above the minimum necessary to comply with the renewables portfolio standard must be established. The renewable energy procurement plan must include an assessment of annual or multiyear portfolio supplies and demand, potential compliance delays, and a bid solicitation setting forth the need for eligible renewable energy resources of each deliverability characteristic, required online dates, and locational preferences, if any.
A:
Under existing law, the Public Utilities Commission has regulatory authority over public utilities, including electrical corporations. The Public Utilities Act requires the commission to review and accept, modify, or reject a procurement plan for each electrical corporation based on whether it includes specified elements or incentive mechanisms, and whether it accomplishes certain objectives. The California Renewables Portfolio Standard Program, within the act, requires retail sellers, defined as including electrical corporations, and local publicly owned electric utilities to purchase specified minimum quantities of electricity products from eligible renewable energy resources, as defined, for specified compliance periods. The program requires the commission to direct each electrical corporation to annually prepare a renewable energy procurement plan to satisfy its procurement requirements pursuant to the program. To the extent feasible, the renewable energy procurement plan is to be proposed, reviewed, and adopted as part of, and pursuant to, the general procurement plan process.
This bill would make a nonsubstantive revision to the provision that requires, to the extent feasible, that the renewable energy procurement plan be proposed, reviewed, and adopted as part of, and pursuant to, the general procurement plan process.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 1777.5 of the Labor Code is amended to read:
1777.5.
(a) This chapter does not prevent the employment of properly registered apprentices upon public works.
(b) (1) Every apprentice employed upon public works shall be paid the prevailing rate of per diem wages for apprentices in the trade to which he or she is registered and shall be employed only at the work of the craft or trade to which he or she is registered.
(2) Unless otherwise provided by a collective bargaining agreement, when a contractor requests the dispatch of an apprentice pursuant to this section to perform work on a public works project and requires the apprentice to fill out an application or undergo testing, training, an examination, or other preemployment process as a condition of employment, the apprentice shall be paid for the time spent on the required preemployment activity, including travel time to and from the required activity, if any, at the prevailing rate of per diem wages for apprentices in the trade to which he or she is registered. Unless otherwise provided by a collective bargaining agreement, a contractor is not required to compensate an apprentice for the time spent on preemployment activities if the apprentice is required to take a preemployment drug or alcohol test and he or she fails to pass that test.
(c) Only apprentices, as defined in Section 3077, who are in training under apprenticeship standards that have been approved by the Chief of the Division of Apprenticeship Standards and who are parties to written apprentice agreements under Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 3070) of Division 3 are eligible to be employed at the apprentice wage rate on public works. The employment and training of each apprentice shall be in accordance with either of the following:
(1) The apprenticeship standards and apprentice agreements under which he or she is training.
(2) The rules and regulations of the California Apprenticeship Council.
(d) If the contractor to whom the contract is awarded by the state or any political subdivision, in performing any of the work under the contract, employs workers in any apprenticeable craft or trade, the contractor shall employ apprentices in at least the ratio set forth in this section and may apply to any apprenticeship program in the craft or trade that can provide apprentices to the site of the public work for a certificate approving the contractor under the apprenticeship standards for the employment and training of apprentices in the area or industry affected. However, the decision of the apprenticeship program to approve or deny a certificate shall be subject to review by the Administrator of Apprenticeship. The apprenticeship program or programs, upon approving the contractor, shall arrange for the dispatch of apprentices to the contractor. A contractor covered by an apprenticeship program’s standards shall not be required to submit any additional application in order to include additional public works contracts under that program. “Apprenticeable craft or trade,” as used in this section, means a craft or trade determined as an apprenticeable occupation in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the California Apprenticeship Council. As used in this section, “contractor” includes any subcontractor under a contractor who performs any public works not excluded by subdivision (o).
(e) Before commencing work on a contract for public works, every contractor shall submit contract award information to an applicable apprenticeship program that can supply apprentices to the site of the public work. The information submitted shall include an estimate of journeyman hours to be performed under the contract, the number of apprentices proposed to be employed, and the approximate dates the apprentices would be employed. A copy of this information shall also be submitted to the awarding body, if requested by the awarding body. Within 60 days after concluding work on the contract, each contractor and subcontractor shall submit to the awarding body, if requested, and to the apprenticeship program a verified statement of the journeyman and apprentice hours performed on the contract. The information under this subdivision shall be public. The apprenticeship programs shall retain this information for 12 months.
(f) The apprenticeship program supplying apprentices to the area of the site of the public work shall ensure equal employment and affirmative action in apprenticeship for women and minorities.
(g) The ratio of work performed by apprentices to journeymen employed in a particular craft or trade on the public work may be no higher than the ratio stipulated in the apprenticeship standards under which the apprenticeship program operates if the contractor agrees to be bound by those standards. However, except as otherwise provided in this section, in no case shall the ratio be less than one hour of apprentice work for every five hours of journeyman work.
(h) This ratio of apprentice work to journeyman work shall apply during any day or portion of a day when any journeyman is employed at the jobsite and shall be computed on the basis of the hours worked during the day by journeymen so employed. Any work performed by a journeyman in excess of eight hours per day or 40 hours per week shall not be used to calculate the ratio. The contractor shall employ apprentices for the number of hours computed as above before the end of the contract or, in the case of a subcontractor, before the end of the subcontract. However, the contractor shall endeavor, to the greatest extent possible, to employ apprentices during the same time period that the journeymen in the same craft or trade are employed at the jobsite. When an hourly apprenticeship ratio is not feasible for a particular craft or trade, the Administrator of Apprenticeship, upon application of an apprenticeship program, may order a minimum ratio of not less than one apprentice for each five journeymen in a craft or trade classification.
(i) A contractor covered by this section who has agreed to be covered by an apprenticeship program’s standards upon the issuance of the approval certificate, or who has been previously approved for an apprenticeship program in the craft or trade, shall employ the number of apprentices or the ratio of apprentices to journeymen stipulated in the applicable apprenticeship standards, but in no event less than the 1-to-5 ratio required by subdivision (g).
(j) Upon proper showing by a contractor that he or she employs apprentices in a particular craft or trade in the state on all of his or her contracts on an annual average of not less than one hour of apprentice work for every five hours of labor performed by journeymen, the Administrator of Apprenticeship may grant a certificate exempting the contractor from the 1-to-5 hourly ratio, as set forth in this section for that craft or trade.
(k) An apprenticeship program has the discretion to grant to a participating contractor or contractor association a certificate, which shall be subject to the approval of the Administrator of Apprenticeship, exempting the contractor from the 1-to-5 ratio set forth in this section when it finds that any one of the following conditions is met:
(1) Unemployment for the previous three-month period in the area exceeds an average of 15 percent.
(2) The number of apprentices in training in the area exceeds a ratio of 1 to 5.
(3) There is a showing that the apprenticeable craft or trade is replacing at least one-thirtieth of its journeymen annually through apprenticeship training, either on a statewide basis or on a local basis.
(4) Assignment of an apprentice to any work performed under a public works contract would create a condition that would jeopardize his or her life or the life, safety, or property of fellow employees or the public at large, or the specific task to which the apprentice is to be assigned is of a nature that training cannot be provided by a journeyman.
(l) If an exemption is granted pursuant to subdivision (k) to an organization that represents contractors in a specific trade from the 1-to-5 ratio on a local or statewide basis, the member contractors shall not be required to submit individual applications for approval to local joint apprenticeship committees, if they are already covered by the local apprenticeship standards.
(m) (1) A contractor to whom a contract is awarded, who, in performing any of the work under the contract, employs journeymen or apprentices in any apprenticeable craft or trade shall contribute to the California Apprenticeship Council the same amount that the director determines is the prevailing amount of apprenticeship training contributions in the area of the public works site. A contractor may take as a credit for payments to the council any amounts paid by the contractor to an approved apprenticeship program that can supply apprentices to the site of the public works project. The contractor may add the amount of the contributions in computing his or her bid for the contract.
(2) At the conclusion of the 2002–03 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, the California Apprenticeship Council shall distribute training contributions received by the council under this subdivision, less the expenses of the Department of Industrial Relations for administering this subdivision, by making grants to approved apprenticeship programs for the purpose of training apprentices. The funds shall be distributed as follows:
(A) If there is an approved multiemployer apprenticeship program serving the same craft or trade and geographic area for which the training contributions were made to the council, a grant to that program shall be made.
(B) If there are two or more approved multiemployer apprenticeship programs serving the same craft or trade and county for which the training contributions were made to the council, the grant shall be divided among those programs based on the number of apprentices from that county registered in each program.
(C) All training contributions not distributed under subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall be used to defray the future expenses of the Department of Industrial Relations for the administration and enforcement of apprenticeship standards and requirements under this code.
(3) All training contributions received pursuant to this subdivision shall be deposited in the Apprenticeship Training Contribution Fund, which is hereby created in the State Treasury. Upon appropriation by the Legislature, all moneys in the Apprenticeship Training Contribution Fund shall be used for the purpose of carrying out this subdivision and to pay the expenses of the Department of Industrial Relations.
(n) The body awarding the contract shall cause to be inserted in the contract stipulations to effectuate this section. The stipulations shall fix the responsibility of compliance with this section for all apprenticeable occupations with the prime contractor.
(o) This section does not apply to contracts of general contractors or to contracts of specialty contractors not bidding for work through a general or prime contractor when the contracts of general contractors or those specialty contractors involve less than thirty thousand dollars ($30,000).
(p) An awarding body that implements an approved labor compliance program in accordance with subdivision (b) of Section 1771.5 may, with the approval of the director, assist in the enforcement of this section under the terms and conditions prescribed by the director.
SEC. 2.
No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution because the only costs that may be incurred by a local agency or school district will be incurred because this act creates a new crime or infraction, eliminates a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the meaning of Section 17556 of the Government Code, or changes the definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution.
A_model:
The article describes California Labor Code Section 1777.5, which allows properly registered apprentices to be employed on public works projects. The section specifies the ratio of apprentices to journeymen that can be employed, and requires apprentices to be paid the prevailing rate of per diem wages for their trade. The article also outlines the requirements for apprentices to be employed on public works projects, including being properly registered, being employed only in their assigned trade, and being paid the prevailing rate of per diem wages. The article further specifies the eligibility requirements for apprentices to be employed at the apprentice wage rate on public works, and the responsibilities of contractors and apprenticeship programs in ensuring equal employment and affirmative action for women and minorities.
A:
Existing law requires that, except as specified, not less than the general prevailing rate of per diem wages, determined by the Director of Industrial Relations, be paid to workers employed on public works projects. Under existing law, an apprentice employed upon public works is required to be paid the prevailing rate of per diem wages for apprentices in the trade to which he or she is registered and to be employed only at the work of the craft or trade to which he or she is registered, as specified.
This bill would require, when a contractor requests the dispatch of an apprentice to perform work on a public works project and requires compliance with certain preemployment activities as a condition of employment, as specified, that the apprentice be paid the prevailing rate for the time spent on any required preemployment activity, including travel time to and from the activity, if any, except as specified.
Because this bill would expand the application of the prevailing wage requirements, the violation of which is a crime, it would impose a state-mandated local program.
The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.
This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 11461.3 of the Welfare and Institutions Code is amended to read:
11461.3.
(a) The Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program is hereby established for the purpose of making the amount paid to approved relative caregivers for the in-home care of children placed with them who are ineligible for AFDC-FC payments equal to the amount paid on behalf of children who are eligible for AFDC-FC payments. This is an optional program for counties choosing to participate, and in so doing, participating counties agree to the terms of this section as a condition of their participation. It is the intent of the Legislature that the funding described in paragraph (1) of subdivision (g) for the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program be appropriated, and available for use from January through December of each year, unless otherwise specified.
(b) (1) Subject to subdivision (e), effective January 1, 2015, participating counties shall pay an approved relative caregiver a per child per month rate in return for the care and supervision, as defined in subdivision (b) of Section 11460, of a child that is placed with the relative caregiver that is equal to the basic rate paid to foster care providers pursuant to subdivision (g) of Section 11461, if both of the following conditions are met:
(A) The county with payment responsibility has notified the department in writing by October 1 of the year before participation begins of its decision to participate in the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program.
(B) The related child placed in the home meets all of the following requirements:
(i) The child resides in California.
(ii) The child is described by subdivision (b), (c), or (e) of Section 11401 and the county welfare department or the county probation department is responsible for the placement and care of the child.
(iii) The child is not eligible for AFDC-FC while placed with the approved relative caregiver because the child is not eligible for federal financial participation in the AFDC-FC payment.
(2)
Participating
Until January 1, 2020, and subject to the availability of funds, participating
counties shall pay to an approved relative caregiver, for each child eligible for benefits pursuant to this section, an annual clothing allowance of two hundred forty dollars ($240). The clothing allowance shall be paid for a cumulative total of three years.
(c) Any income or benefits received by an eligible child or the approved relative caregiver on behalf of the eligible child that would be offset against the basic rate paid to a foster care provider pursuant to subdivision (g) of Section 11461, shall be offset from any funds that are not CalWORKs funds paid to the approved relative caregiver pursuant to this section.
(d) Participating counties shall recoup an overpayment in the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program received by an approved relative caregiver using the standards and processes for overpayment recoupment that are applicable to overpayments to an approved home of a relative, as specified in Section 11466.24. Recouped overpayments shall not be subject to remittance to the federal government. Any overpaid funds that are collected by the participating counties shall be remitted to the state after subtracting both of the following:
(1) An amount not to exceed the county share of the CalWORKs portion of the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program payment, if any.
(2) Any other county funds that were included in the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program payment.
(e) A county’s election to participate in the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program shall affirmatively indicate that the county understands and agrees to all of the following conditions:
(1) Commencing October 1, 2014, the county shall notify the department in writing of its decision to participate in the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program. Failure to make timely notification, without good cause as determined by the department, shall preclude the county from participating in the program for the upcoming calendar year. Annually thereafter, any county not already participating who elects to do so shall notify the department in writing no later than October 1 of its decision to participate for the upcoming calendar year.
(2) The county shall confirm that it will make per child per month payments to all approved relative caregivers on behalf of eligible children in the amount specified in subdivision (b) for the duration of the participation of the county in this program.
(3) The county shall confirm that it will be solely responsible to pay any additional costs needed to make all payments pursuant to subdivision (b) if the state and federal funds allocated to the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program pursuant to paragraph (1) of subdivision (g) are insufficient to make all eligible payments.
(f) (1) A county deciding to opt out of the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program shall provide at least 120 days’ prior written notice of that decision to the department. Additionally, the county shall provide at least 90 days’ prior written notice to the approved relative caregiver or caregivers informing them that his or her per child per month payment will be reduced and the date that the reduction will occur.
(2) The department shall presume that all counties have opted out of the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program if the funding appropriated for the current 12-month period is reduced below the amount specified in subparagraph (B), subparagraph (C), or subparagraph (D) of paragraph (2) of subdivision (g) for that 12-month period, unless a county notifies the department in writing of its intent to opt in within 60 days of enactment of the State Budget. The counties shall provide at least 90 days’ prior written notice to the approved relative caregiver or caregivers informing them that his or her per child per month payment will be reduced, and the date that reduction will occur.
(3) Any reduction in payments received by an approved relative caregiver on behalf of a child under this section that results from a decision by a county, including the presumed opt-out pursuant to paragraph (2), to not participate in the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program shall be exempt from state hearing jurisdiction under Section 10950.
(g) (1) The following funding shall be used for the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program:
(A) The applicable regional per-child CalWORKs grant, in accordance with subdivision (a) of Section 11253.4.
(B)  General Fund resources, as appropriated in paragraph (2).
(C) County funds only to the extent required under paragraph (3) of subdivision (e).
(D) Funding described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) is intended to fully fund the base caseload of approved relative caregivers, which is defined as the number of approved relative caregivers caring for a child who is not eligible to receive AFDC-FC payments, as of July 1, 2014.
(2) The following amount is hereby appropriated from the General Fund as follows:
(A) The sum of fifteen million dollars ($15,000,000), for the period of January 1, 2015, to June 30, 2015, inclusive.
(B) For the period of July 1, 2015, to June 30, 2016, inclusive, there shall be appropriated an amount equal to the sum of all of the following:
(i) Two times the amount appropriated pursuant to subparagraph (A), inclusive of any increase pursuant to paragraph (3).
(ii) The amount necessary to increase or decrease the CalWORKs funding associated with the base caseload described in subparagraph (D) of paragraph (1) to reflect any change from the prior fiscal year in the applicable regional per-child CalWORKs grant described in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1).
(iii) The additional amount necessary to fully fund the base caseload described in subparagraph (D) of paragraph (1), reflective of the annual California Necessities Index increase to the basic rate paid to foster care providers.
(C) For every 12-month period thereafter, commencing with the period of July 1, 2016, to June 30, 2017, inclusive, the sum of all of the following shall be appropriated for purposes of this section:
(i) The total General Fund amount provided pursuant to this paragraph for the previous 12-month period.
(ii) The amount necessary to increase or decrease the CalWORKs funding associated with the base caseload described in subparagraph (D) of paragraph (1) to reflect any change from the prior fiscal year in the applicable regional per-child CalWORKs grant described in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1).
(iii) The additional amount necessary to fully fund the base caseload described in subparagraph (D) of paragraph (1), reflective of the annual California Necessities Index increase to the basic rate paid to foster care providers.
(D)  Notwithstanding clauses (ii) and (iii) of subparagraph (B) and clauses (ii) and (iii) of subparagraph (C), the total General Fund appropriation made pursuant to subparagraph (B) shall not be less than the greater of the following amounts:
(i) Thirty million dollars ($30,000,000).
(ii) Two times the amount appropriated pursuant to subparagraph (A), inclusive of any increase pursuant to paragraph (3).
(3) To the extent that the appropriation made by subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) is insufficient to fully fund the base caseload of approved relative caregivers as of July 1, 2014, as described in subparagraph (D) of paragraph (1), for the period of January 1, 2015, to June 30, 2015, inclusive, as jointly determined by the department and the County Welfare Directors’ Association and approved by the Department of Finance on or before October 1, 2015, the amount specified in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2) shall be increased by the amount necessary to fully fund that base caseload.
(4) Funds available pursuant to paragraph (2) shall be allocated to participating counties proportionate to the number of their approved relative caregiver placements, using a methodology and timing developed by the department, following consultation with county human services agencies and their representatives.
(5) Notwithstanding subdivision (e), if in any calendar year the entire amount of funding appropriated by the state for the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program has not been fully allocated to or utilized by participating counties, a participating county that has paid any funds pursuant to subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (g) may request reimbursement for those funds from the department. The authority of the department to approve the requests shall be limited by the amount of available unallocated funds.
(h) An approved relative caregiver receiving payments on behalf of a child pursuant to this section shall not be eligible to receive additional CalWORKs payments on behalf of the same child under Section 11450.
(i) To the extent permitted by federal law, payments received by the approved relative caregiver from the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program shall not be considered income for the purpose of determining other public benefits.
(j) Prior to referral of any individual or recipient, or that person’s case, to the local child support agency for child support services pursuant to Section 17415 of the Family Code, the county human services agency shall determine if an applicant or recipient has good cause for noncooperation, as set forth in Section 11477.04. If the applicant or recipient claims good cause exception at any subsequent time to the county human services agency or the local child support agency, the local child support agency shall suspend child support services until the county social services agency determines the good cause claim, as set forth in Section 11477.04. If good cause is determined to exist, the local child support agency shall suspend child support services until the applicant or recipient requests their resumption, and shall take other measures that are necessary to protect the applicant or recipient and the children. If the applicant or recipient is the parent of the child for whom aid is sought and the parent is found to have not cooperated without good cause as provided in Section 11477.04, the applicant’s or recipient’s family grant shall be reduced by 25 percent for the time the failure to cooperate lasts.
(k) Consistent with Section 17552 of the Family Code, if aid is paid under this chapter on behalf of a child who is under the jurisdiction of the juvenile court and whose parent or guardian is receiving reunification services, the county human services agency shall determine, prior to referral of the case to the local child support agency for child support services, whether the referral is in the best interest of the child, taking into account both of the following:
(1) Whether the payment of support by the parent will pose a barrier to the proposed reunification in that the payment of support will compromise the parent’s ability to meet the requirements of the parent’s reunification plan.
(2) Whether the payment of support by the parent will pose a barrier to the proposed reunification in that the payment of support will compromise the parent’s current or future ability to meet the financial needs of the child.
SEC. 2.
No appropriation pursuant to Section 15200 of the Welfare and Institutions Code shall be made for purposes of implementing this act.
A_model:
The article describes the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program, which is established in the State of California to provide financial assistance to approved relative caregivers who care for children who are ineligible for AFDC-FC payments. The program is optional for counties and participating counties agree to certain terms and conditions. The article outlines the eligibility criteria for participating counties and caregivers, the amount of money that will be paid to approved relative caregivers, and the clothing allowance that will be provided to eligible children. The article also states that any income or benefits received by an eligible child or the approved relative caregiver on behalf of the eligible child that would be offset against the basic rate paid to a foster care provider pursuant to subdivision (g) of Section 11461 shall be offset from any funds that are not CalWORKs funds paid to the approved relative caregiver pursuant to this section. Finally, the article explains the conditions under which a county can opt out of the program and the impact of such a decision on the approved relative caregiver and the child.
A:
Existing law requires each county to provide cash assistance and other social services to needy families through the California Work Opportunity and Responsibility to Kids (CalWORKs) program using federal Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF) block grant program, state, and county funds. Existing law specifies the amounts of cash aid to be paid each month to CalWORKs recipients.
Existing law establishes the Aid to Families with Dependent Children-Foster Care (AFDC-FC) program, under which counties provide payments to foster care providers on behalf of qualified children in foster care. Under existing law, a child who is placed in the approved home of a relative is eligible for AFDC-FC if he or she is eligible for federal financial participation in the AFDC-FC payment, as specified. Existing law provides for benefits for a child who is placed in the approved home of a relative and who is ineligible for AFDC-FC pursuant to the CalWORKs program. Existing law establishes the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program in counties choosing to participate, for the purpose of making the amount paid to relative caregivers for the in-home care of children placed with them who are ineligible for AFDC-FC payments equal to the amount paid on behalf of children who are eligible for AFDC-FC payments.
This bill would
require
require, until January 1, 2020, and subject to the availability of funds,
counties participating in the Approved Relative Caregiver Funding Option Program to pay to an approved relative caregiver, for each child eligible for benefits pursuant to the program, an annual clothing allowance of $240 for a cumulative total of three years.
Existing law continuously appropriates moneys from the General Fund to defray a portion of county costs under the CalWORKs program.
This bill would instead provide that the continuous appropriation would not be made for purposes of implementing the bill.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 2903 of the Business and Professions Code is amended to read:
2903.
(a) No person may engage in the practice of psychology, or represent himself or herself to be a psychologist, without a license granted under this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The practice of psychology is defined as rendering or offering to render to individuals, groups, organizations, or the public any psychological service involving the application of psychological principles, methods, and procedures of understanding, predicting, and influencing behavior, such as the principles pertaining to learning, perception, motivation, emotions, and interpersonal relationships; and the methods and procedures of interviewing, counseling, psychotherapy, behavior modification, and hypnosis; and of constructing, administering, and interpreting tests of mental abilities, aptitudes, interests, attitudes, personality characteristics, emotions, and motivations.
(b) The application of these principles and methods includes, but is not restricted to: assessment, diagnosis, prevention, treatment, and intervention to increase effective functioning of individuals, groups, and organizations.
(c) Psychotherapy within the meaning of this chapter means the use of psychological methods in a professional relationship to assist a person or persons to acquire greater human effectiveness or to modify feelings, conditions, attitudes, and behaviors that are emotionally, intellectually, or socially ineffectual or maladaptive.
SEC. 2.
Section 2913 of the Business and Professions Code is amended to read:
2913.
A person other than a licensed psychologist may be employed by a licensed psychologist, by a licensed physician and surgeon who is board certified in psychiatry by the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology, by a clinic that provides mental health services under contract pursuant to Section 5614 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, by a psychological corporation, by a licensed psychology clinic as defined in Section 1204.1 of the Health and Safety Code, or by a medical corporation to perform limited psychological functions if all of the following apply:
(a) The person is termed a “psychological assistant.”
(b) The person (1) has completed a master’s degree in psychology or education with the field of specialization in psychology or counseling psychology, or (2) has been admitted to candidacy for a doctoral degree in psychology or education with the field of specialization in psychology or counseling psychology, after having satisfactorily completed three or more years of postgraduate education in psychology and having passed preliminary doctoral examinations, or (3) has completed a doctoral degree that qualifies for licensure under Section 2914, in an accredited or approved university, college, or professional school located in the United States or Canada.
(c) The person is at all times under the immediate supervision, as defined in regulations adopted by the board, of a licensed psychologist, or board certified psychiatrist, who shall be responsible for insuring that the extent, kind, and quality of the psychological services he or she performs are consistent with his or her training and experience and be responsible for his or her compliance with this chapter and regulations duly adopted hereunder, including those provisions set forth in Section 2960.
(d) (1) The licensed psychologist, board certified psychiatrist, contract clinic, psychological corporation, or medical corporation, has registered the psychological assistant with the board. The registration shall be renewed annually in accordance with regulations adopted by the board.
(2) No licensed psychologist may register, employ, or supervise more than three psychological assistants at any given time unless specifically authorized to do so by the board. No board certified psychiatrist may register, employ, or supervise more than one psychological assistant at any given time. No contract clinic, psychological corporation, or medical corporation may employ more than 10 assistants at any one time. No contract clinic may register, employ, or provide supervision for more than one psychological assistant for each designated full-time staff psychiatrist who is qualified and supervises the psychological assistants. No psychological assistant may provide psychological services to the public except as an employee of a licensed psychologist, licensed physician, contract clinic, psychological corporation, or medical corporation.
(e) The psychological assistant shall comply with regulations that the board may, from time to time, duly adopt relating to the fulfillment of requirements in continuing education.
(f) No person shall practice as a psychological assistant who is found by the board to be in violation of Section 2960 and the rules and regulations duly adopted pursuant to that section.
SEC. 3.
Section 2914 of the Business and Professions Code is amended to read:
2914.
Each applicant for licensure shall comply with all of the following requirements:
(a) Is not subject to denial of licensure under Division 1.5 (commencing with Section 475).
(b) (1) Possess an earned doctorate degree (A) in psychology, (B) in educational psychology, or (C) in education with the field of specialization in counseling psychology or educational psychology. Except as provided in subdivision (g), this degree or training shall be obtained from an accredited university, college, or professional school. The board shall make the final determination as to whether a degree meets the requirements of this section.
(2) No educational institution shall be denied recognition as an accredited academic institution solely because its program is not accredited by any professional organization of psychologists, and nothing in this chapter or in the administration of this chapter shall require the registration with the board by educational institutions of their departments of psychology or their doctoral programs in psychology.
(3) An applicant for licensure trained in an educational institution outside the United States or Canada shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the board that he or she possesses a doctorate degree in psychology that is equivalent to a degree earned from a regionally accredited university in the United States or Canada. These applicants shall provide the board with a comprehensive evaluation of the degree performed by a foreign credential evaluation service that is a member of the National Association of Credential Evaluation Services (NACES), and any other documentation the board deems necessary.
(c) (1) Have engaged for at least two years in supervised professional experience under the direction of a licensed psychologist, the specific requirements of which shall be defined by the board in its regulations, or under suitable alternative supervision as determined by the board in regulations duly adopted under this chapter, at least one year of which shall be after being awarded the doctorate in psychology. The supervisor shall submit verification of the experience required by this subdivision to the trainee in a manner prescribed by the board. If the supervising licensed psychologist fails to provide verification to the trainee in a timely manner, the board may establish alternative procedures for obtaining the necessary documentation. Absent good cause, the failure of a supervising licensed psychologist to provide the verification to the board upon request shall constitute unprofessional conduct.
(2) The board shall establish qualifications by regulation for supervising psychologists.
(d) Take and pass the examination required by Section 2941 unless otherwise exempted by the board under this chapter.
(e) Show by evidence satisfactory to the board that he or she has completed training in the detection and treatment of alcohol and other chemical substance dependency. This requirement applies only to applicants who matriculate on or after September 1, 1985.
(f) (1) Show by evidence satisfactory to the board that he or she has completed coursework in spousal or partner abuse assessment, detection, and intervention. This requirement applies to applicants who began graduate training during the period commencing on January 1, 1995, and ending on December 31, 2003.
(2) An applicant who began graduate training on or after January 1, 2004, shall show by evidence satisfactory to the board that he or she has completed a minimum of 15 contact hours of coursework in spousal or partner abuse assessment, detection, and intervention strategies, including knowledge of community resources, cultural factors, and same gender abuse dynamics. An applicant may request an exemption from this requirement if he or she intends to practice in an area that does not include the direct provision of mental health services.
(3) Coursework required under this subdivision may be satisfactory if taken either in fulfillment of other educational requirements for licensure or in a separate course. This requirement for coursework shall be satisfied by, and the board shall accept in satisfaction of the requirement, a certification from the chief academic officer of the educational institution from which the applicant graduated that the required coursework is included within the institution’s required curriculum for graduation.
(g) An applicant holding a doctoral degree in psychology from an approved institution is deemed to meet the requirements of this section if both of the following are true:
(1) The approved institution offered a doctoral degree in psychology designed to prepare students for a license to practice psychology and was approved by the former Bureau for Private Postsecondary and Vocational Education on or before July 1, 1999.
(2) The approved institution has not, since July 1, 1999, had a new location, as described in Section 94823.5 of the Education Code.
SEC. 4.
Section 1010 of the Evidence Code is amended to read:
1010.
As used in this article, “psychotherapist” means a person who is, or is reasonably believed by the patient to be:
(a) A person authorized to practice medicine in any state or nation who devotes, or is reasonably believed by the patient to devote, a substantial portion of his or her time to the practice of psychiatry.
(b) A person licensed as a psychologist under Chapter 6.6 (commencing with Section 2900) of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code.
(c) A person licensed as a clinical social worker under Article 4 (commencing with Section 4996) of Chapter 14 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code, when he or she is engaged in applied psychotherapy of a nonmedical nature.
(d) A person who is serving as a school psychologist and holds a credential authorizing that service issued by the state.
(e) A person licensed as a marriage and family therapist under Chapter 13 (commencing with Section 4980) of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code.
(f) A person registered as a psychological assistant who is under the supervision of a licensed psychologist or board certified psychiatrist as required by Section 2913 of the Business and Professions Code, or a person registered as a marriage and family therapist intern who is under the supervision of a licensed marriage and family therapist, a licensed clinical social worker, a licensed psychologist, or a licensed physician and surgeon certified in psychiatry, as specified in Section 4980.44 of the Business and Professions Code.
(g) A person registered as an associate clinical social worker who is under supervision as specified in Section 4996.23 of the Business and Professions Code.
(h) A person who registered with the Board of Psychology as a registered psychologist and who is under the supervision of a licensed psychologist or board certified psychiatrist.
(i) A psychological intern as defined in Section 2911 of the Business and Professions Code who is under the supervision of a licensed psychologist or board certified psychiatrist.
(j) A trainee, as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 4980.03 of the Business and Professions Code, who is fulfilling his or her supervised practicum required by subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 4980.36 of, or subdivision (c) of Section 4980.37 of, the Business and Professions Code and is supervised by a licensed psychologist, a board certified psychiatrist, a licensed clinical social worker, a licensed marriage and family therapist, or a licensed professional clinical counselor.
(k) A person licensed as a registered nurse pursuant to Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 2700) of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code, who possesses a master’s degree in psychiatric-mental health nursing and is listed as a psychiatric-mental health nurse by the Board of Registered Nursing.
(l) An advanced practice registered nurse who is certified as a clinical nurse specialist pursuant to Article 9 (commencing with Section 2838) of Chapter 6 of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code and who participates in expert clinical practice in the specialty of psychiatric-mental health nursing.
(m) A person rendering mental health treatment or counseling services as authorized pursuant to Section 6924 of the Family Code.
(n) A person licensed as a professional clinical counselor under Chapter 16 (commencing with Section 4999.10) of Division 2 of the Business and Professions Code.
(o) A person registered as a clinical counselor intern who is under the supervision of a licensed professional clinical counselor, a licensed marriage and family therapist, a licensed clinical social worker, a licensed psychologist, or a licensed physician and surgeon certified in psychiatry, as specified in Sections 4999.42 to 4999.46, inclusive, of the Business and Professions Code.
(p) A clinical counselor trainee, as defined in subdivision (g) of Section 4999.12 of the Business and Professions Code, who is fulfilling his or her supervised practicum required by paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 4999.32 of, or paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of Section 4999.33 of, the Business and Professions Code, and is supervised by a licensed psychologist, a board-certified psychiatrist, a licensed clinical social worker, a licensed marriage and family therapist, or a licensed professional clinical counselor.
SEC. 5.
No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution because the only costs that may be incurred by a local agency or school district will be incurred because this act creates a new crime or infraction, eliminates a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the meaning of Section 17556 of the Government Code, or changes the definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution.
A_model:
The article describes changes to the California Business and Professions Code related to the practice of psychology. Section 2903 specifies the requirements for licensure as a psychologist, including the completion of a master's or doctoral degree in psychology or education with a focus on psychology or counseling psychology, and the completion of supervised professional experience. Section 2913 allows psychological assistants to perform limited psychological functions under the supervision of a licensed psychologist, provided they meet certain education and experience requirements. Section 2914 outlines the requirements for licensure as a psychologist, including the completion of a doctoral degree in psychology, the completion of supervised professional experience, and passing the examination required by Section 2941. The article also amends Section 1010 of the Evidence Code to define "psychotherapist" and includes additional professions and titles within this definition.
A:
The Psychology Licensing Law provides for the licensure and regulation of psychologists by the Board of Psychology. The law defines the practice of psychology as rendering or offering to render, for a fee, psychological services involving the application of psychological principles and methods, including the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of psychological problems and emotional and mental disorders. The law prohibits unlicensed persons from practicing psychology, but authorizes unlicensed persons, including psychological assistants who meet certain requirements and do not provide psychological services to the public for a fee, to perform limited psychological functions. The law requires applicants for licensure to, among other things, engage in at least 2 years of supervised professional experience under the direction of a licensed psychologist and authorizes an applicant who obtains this experience in the United States to send verification of the experience directly to the board if the supervising licensed psychologist fails to submit the verification within 30 days of receiving a request from the applicant, as specified. The law requires the board to establish qualifications by regulation for supervising licensed psychologists and to review and approve applicants for the position of supervising psychologist on a case-by-case basis. The law provides that a violation of any of its provisions is a misdemeanor.
This bill would remove the reference to fees for services from the definition of the practice of psychology, thereby expanding that definition. The bill would further modify that definition to specify that the application of psychological principles and methods includes assessment, diagnosis, prevention, treatment, and intervention to increase effective functioning of individuals, groups, and organizations. The bill would revise the above-described authorization for psychological assistants to prohibit services to the public, except as specified, without reference to a fee. The bill would revise that experience verification procedure to require a supervising licensed psychologist to submit verification of the experience to the trainee in a manner prescribed by the board, and would authorize the board to establish alternative procedures for obtaining the necessary documentation if the supervising licensed psychologist fails to provide that verification in a timely manner. The bill would make the failure to provide verification to the board upon request, absent good cause, unprofessional conduct. The bill would eliminate the requirement that the board review and approve applicants for the position of supervising psychologist on a case-by-case basis. The bill would also make technical and conforming changes. By expanding the scope of a crime, this bill would impose a state-mandated local program.
Existing law establishes for a patient of a psychotherapist, whether or not a party to a proceeding, the privilege to refuse to disclose and to prevent another from disclosing a confidential communication between the patient and psychotherapist, as specified, and defines a psychotherapist for these purposes.
This bill would include in the definition of psychotherapist a person who is registered with the Board of Psychology as a registered psychologist and who is under the supervision of a licensed psychologist or a board certified psychiatrist.
The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.
This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason.

Q: The people of the State of California do enact as follows:


SECTION 1.
Section 2053 of the Elections Code is amended to read:
2053.
The Secretary of State shall establish a Voting Accessibility Advisory Committee. The Secretary of State shall consult with the committee and consider the committee’s recommendations related to improving the accessibility of elections for voters with disabilities. The Secretary of State may implement the committee’s recommendations as he or she deems appropriate.
(a) The committee shall consist of the Secretary of State, his or her designees, and additional members appointed by the Secretary of State. The appointees shall have demonstrated experience with accessibility requirements for voters with disabilities or be a county elections official.
(b) The committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Secretary of State and shall do all of the following:
(1) Establish guidelines for reaching as many voters with disabilities as practical.
(2) Make recommendations for improving the availability and accessibility of election materials, including, but not limited to, sample ballots, voter information pamphlets, and vote-by-mail ballots, and their delivery in print or alternative formats to voters with disabilities.
(3) Increase the distribution of public service announcements identifying the availability of election materials for voters with disabilities at least 45 days before any federal, state, and local election.
(4) Make recommendations for improving the accessibility of election materials made available on Internet Web sites that are in compliance with the most current, ratified standards under Section 508 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. Sec. 794d), as amended, and the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 adopted by the World Wide Web Consortium for accessibility.
(5) Promote the Secretary of State’s toll-free voter registration telephone line for citizens needing voter registration information, including information for individuals with disabilities, and the California State Library and regional library services for individuals who are unable to read conventional print due to a visual, intellectual, learning, physical, or any other disability.
(6) Make recommendations for providing voters with disabilities the same access and participation as is provided to other voters who are not disabled, including the ability to vote privately and independently.
(7) Establish subcommittees to further the scope and purposes of the committee as they relate to improving voter services and access for individuals with disabilities, including, but not limited to, visually impaired voters and deaf or hard of hearing voters.
(8) Promote the use of plain language and alternative formats for election materials.
(9) Make recommendations for materials to train poll workers on issues related to serving voters with disabilities and providing accessible voting locations.
(c) A member shall not receive compensation, but each member shall be reimbursed for his or her reasonable and necessary expenses in connection with service on the committee.
SEC. 2.
Section 9082.7 of the Elections Code is amended to read:
9082.7.
(a) The Secretary of State shall make available the complete state ballot pamphlet over the Internet. The online version of the state ballot pamphlet shall contain all of the following:
(1) For each candidate listed in the pamphlet, a means to access campaign contribution disclosure reports for the candidate that are available online.
(2) For each state ballot measure listed in the pamphlet, a means to access the consolidated information specified in subdivision (b).
(b) The Secretary of State shall create an Internet Web site, or use other available technology, to consolidate information about each state ballot measure in a manner that is easy for voters to access and understand. The information shall include all of the following:
(1) A summary of the ballot measure’s content.
(2) The total amount of reported contributions made in support of and opposition to the ballot measure, calculated and updated as follows:
(A) (i) The total amount of contributions in support of the ballot measure shall be calculated by adding together the total amounts of contributions made in support of the ballot measure and reported in semiannual statements required by Section 84200 of the Government Code, preelection statements required by Section 84200.5 of the Government Code, campaign statements required by Section 84202.3 of the Government Code, and late contribution reports required by Section 84203 of the Government Code that are reported within 16 days of the election at which the measure will appear on the ballot.
(ii) The total amount of contributions in opposition to the ballot measure shall be calculated by adding together the total amounts of contributions made in opposition to the ballot measure and reported in semiannual statements required by Section 84200 of the Government Code, preelection statements required by Section 84200.5 of the Government Code, campaign statements required by Section 84202.3 of the Government Code, and late contribution reports required by Section 84203 of the Government Code that are reported within 16 days of the election at which the measure will appear on the ballot.
(iii) For purposes of determining the total amount of reported contributions pursuant to this subparagraph, the Secretary of State shall, to the extent practicable with respect to committees primarily formed to support or oppose a ballot measure, do both of the following:
(I) Ensure that transfers of funds between primarily formed committees are not counted twice.
(II) Treat a contribution made to a primarily formed committee that supports or opposes more than one state ballot measure as if the total amount of that contribution was made for each state ballot measure that the committee supports or opposes.
(B) The total amount of reported contributions calculated under this paragraph for each state ballot measure shall be updated not later than five business days after receipt of a semiannual statement, campaign statement, or preelection statement and not later than two business days after receipt of a late contribution report within 16 days of the election at which the measure will appear on the ballot.
(C) The total amount of reported contributions calculated under this paragraph for each state ballot measure shall be accompanied by an explanation that the contribution totals may be overstated due to the inclusion of contributions made to committees supporting or opposing more than one state ballot measure, as required by subclause (II) of clause (iii) of subparagraph (A).
(3) A current list of the top 10 contributors supporting and opposing the ballot measure, if compiled by the Fair Political Practices Commission pursuant to subdivision (e) of Section 84223 of the Government Code.
(4) (A) A list of each committee primarily formed to support or oppose the ballot measure, as described in Section 82047.5 of the Government Code, and a means to access information about the sources of funding reported for each committee.
(B) Information about the sources of contributions shall be updated as new information becomes available to the public pursuant to the Political Reform Act of 1974 (Title 9 (commencing with Section 81000) of the Government Code).
(C) If a committee identified in subparagraph (A) receives one million dollars ($1,000,000) or more in contributions for an election, the Secretary of State shall provide a means to access online information about the committee’s top 10 contributors reported to the Fair Political Practices Commission pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 84223 of the Government Code.
(D) Notwithstanding paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of Section 84223 of the Government Code, the Fair Political Practices Commission shall automatically provide any list of top 10 contributors created pursuant to Section 84223 of the Government Code, and any subsequent updates to that list, to the Secretary of State for purposes of compliance with this section.
(5) Any other information deemed relevant by the Secretary of State.
(c) Information made available over the Internet pursuant to this section shall meet or exceed the most current, ratified standards under Section 508 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. Sec. 794d), as amended, and the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 adopted by the World Wide Web Consortium for accessibility. The Secretary of State may also implement recommendations of the Voting Accessibility Advisory Committee made pursuant to paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of Section 2053.
SEC. 3.
Section 13300.7 of the Elections Code is amended to read:
13300.7.
Notwithstanding any other law, county and city elections officials may establish procedures designed to permit a voter to opt out of receiving his or her sample ballot, voter pamphlet, notice of polling place, and associated materials by mail, and instead obtain them electronically via email or by accessing them on the county’s or city’s Internet Web site, provided that all of the following conditions are met:
(a) The procedures establish a method of providing notice of and an opportunity by which a voter can notify elections officials of his or her desire to obtain ballot materials electronically in lieu of receiving them by mail.
(b) The voter email address or any other information provided by the voter under this section remains confidential pursuant to Section 6254.4 of the Government Code and Section 2194 of this code.
(c) The procedures provide notice and opportunity for a voter who has opted out of receiving a sample ballot and other materials by mail to opt back into receiving them by mail.
(d) The procedures establish a process by which a voter can apply electronically to become a vote by mail voter.
(e) A voter may only opt out of, or opt back into, receiving his or her sample ballot and other ballot materials by mail if the elections official receives the request and can process it prior to the statutory deadline for the mailing of those materials for the next election, pursuant to Section 13303. If a voter misses this deadline, the request shall take effect the following election.
(f) The procedures shall include a verification process to confirm the voter’s identity, either in writing with a signature card that can be matched to the one on file with the elections official, or if the request is submitted electronically, it shall contain the voter’s California driver’s license number, California identification number, or a partial social security number.
(g) Information made available over the Internet pursuant to this section shall meet or exceed the most current, ratified standards under Section 508 of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C. Sec. 794d), as amended, and the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 adopted by the World Wide Web Consortium for accessibility. Election officials may also implement recommendations of the Voting Accessibility Advisory Committee made pursuant to paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of Section 2053, and of any local Voting Accessibility Advisory Committee created pursuant to the guidelines promulgated by the Secretary of State related to the accessibility of polling places by the physically handicapped.
A_model:
The article describes the creation of a Voting Accessibility Advisory Committee by the State of California. The committee will consist of members appointed by the Secretary of State and will provide recommendations related to improving the accessibility of elections for voters with disabilities. The committee will establish guidelines, promote public service announcements, and increase the distribution of alternative formats for election materials. It will also make recommendations for training poll workers and providing accessible voting locations. The article also mentions the creation of an Internet Web site to consolidate information about each state ballot measure in a manner that is easy for voters to access and understand.
A:
Existing law, the Visually Impaired Voter Assistance Act of 1989, requires the Secretary of State to establish a Visually Impaired Voter Assistance Board and prescribes the composition of the board, as specified. Under existing law the board is required to, among other things, make recommendations to the Secretary of State for improving the availability and accessibility of ballot pamphlet audio recordings and their delivery to visually impaired voters. Existing law also requires the Secretary of State to make available the complete state ballot pamphlet over the Internet, which is required to include specified information. Existing law further authorizes county and city elections officials to establish procedures designed to permit a voter to opt out of receiving his or her sample ballot, voter pamphlet, notice of polling place, and associated materials by mail, and instead obtain them electronically via email or by accessing them on the county’s or city’s Internet Web site, as specified.
This bill would rename the board as the Voting Accessibility Advisory Committee and would instead require the committee to advise the Secretary of State on improving the accessibility of elections, including election materials, as specified, for all voters with disabilities, and would revise the composition of the committee, as specified. The bill would require the Secretary of State to consult with the committee and consider the committee’s recommendations, which the Secretary of State could implement at his or her discretion. The bill would also require the committee to make additional recommendations to the Secretary of State for improving the accessibility of election materials made available over the Internet, and would require the elections materials made available over the Internet to meet or exceed certain standards and guidelines, as specified. The bill would further require the committee to make recommendations for providing voters with disabilities the same access and participation as is provided to other voters who are not disabled, including the ability to vote privately and independently.

